W- welcome back everyone to the Planning Bill and Natural
Environment Bill, hearings this afternoon.
I can see that we already have our next submitter with us,
Airbnb. Uh, so we've got Catherine,
we can see you there, and Louise. Uh, welcome
to the committee this afternoon. You have 20 minutes with
us, so, look, we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your
submission and make some opening remarks, and then we'll open it up for
questions. So over to you.
Wonderful. Thank you for the opportunity to address the committee
today. Uh, my name's Catherine Cossevas, and I'm the acting head of
public policy at Airbnb for Australia and New
Zealand. I am joined today by Louise Espin, senior
associate at Russell McVeagh. I will start by spending the
first eight to 10 minutes sharing information about Airbnb and key
points from our submission. Uh, my comments relate specifically to
short-term accommodation and the opportunity presented by the
planning bill to introduce a nationally consistent regulatory framework
for the sector. Short-term accommodation is a vital
component of the New Zealand economy, supporting local jobs and
small businesses throughout the country.
Our community of hosts are everyday Kiwis who are passionate about
hosting and showcasing all that their communities have to
offer. They provide a range of accommodation options
at a variety of price points. Short-term accommodation also
plays an important role in the, in the visitor economy.
Every day, guests use our platform to travel within New Zealand,
whether it be for a holiday, a work trip, to visit friends and
family, or to attend a major event.
We strongly support the government's broader objectives for planning reform,
particularly in simplifying the planning system, improving
consistency, and enabling economic growth.
And our key message today is, is quite simple.
As New Zealand undertakes comprehensive planning reform, it would be a
missed opportunity not to address greater national
standardization and enablement of short-term accommodation
regulation at the same time. In terms of our overall
position, short-term accommodation is currently regulated in a
highly fragmented way across New Zealand.
Different councils use different definitions of short-term
accommodation. There are different consent requirements, different
operating thresholds, and, and different zoning rules.
And some examples of this include different definitions.
So some plans only define one activity, for example, in
Queenstown, that would be residential visitor accommodation, whereas
others have two separate definitions, as in Christchurch,
where both hosted visitor accommodation and unhosted visitor
accommodation is defined. And another example is differing
rules by activity status. Short-term accommodation is a permitted
activity with permitted standards in most, but not all
residential type zones in key cities and towns.
And with 78 councils that maintain separate district plans with
varying rules, zones, and consent pathways for short-term
accommodation, hosts and platforms like Airbnb
must navigate a patchwork of rules, and this often creates regulatory
uncertainty, unnecessary compliance costs,
administrative burdens for councils and other organizations,
as well as individuals that otherwise need to actively get involved in
long and expensive plan review, or plan change
processes, and then potentially appeals also.
Um, and so this can result in inconsistent outcomes, for
communities. And, and to that end, naturals-- national
standardization would be entirely consistent with one of the central
goals of planning reform itself, which is greater national
consistency. Short-term accommodation is, is fundamentally a
land use issue. It concerns how residential
property is used. The government has emphasized enabling
people to use their private property as they wish, provided it does
not create adverse effects for neighbors.
The basic activities taking place in, in short-term accommodation properties
are sleeping, eating, bathing. Uh, this is the same as, as
any residential use. In many jurisdictions internationally,
including parts of Australia and the United States,
short-term accommodation is treated as a form of residential use, for
this reason. There is therefore no clear justification for
treating short-term accommodation fundamentally differently from
other residential occupancy.And as you're
aware, the planning bill already introduces nat- national
instruments, including national standards, which would be the natural
place to address this issue. National standards would allow
short-term accommodation to be treated uniformly across the country,
significantly reducing regional discrepancies, and
our key submission is, is in support of the planning bill, which sets up the
framework for national standards to be established for national
consistency, for issues such as this.
And so while the content of national standards will be developed at subsequent
stages, Airbnb's submission focuses on the
processes for developing the standards being set up in the right
way, including requiring key stakeholder engagements in the preparation of
national instruments and allowing more than 20 days for
submissions. We, we'd actually suggest 40 working
days. And if, if short-term accommodation is not dealt with on a
nationally consistent basis under this planning reform process, it would then
require resource intensive processes under each land use plan
and result in further costs for councils, stakeholders, and also
individuals. And so for efficiency and clarity, it makes sense
to address short-term accommodation properly now, once,
and within this reform process. Um, but I'll now touch on the
economic and tourism benefits of, of short-term rental
accommodation. Um, so the benefits are closely aligned with the planning
bill's objective of supporting and enabling economic
growth, and change through the development and use of
land. Short-term rentals contribute significantly to New Zealand's
visitor economy, providing accommodation choice, flexible
supply, options across different locations and different
price points. Importantly, short-term accommodation spreads
tourism spending beyond traditional accommodation hubs,
including in smaller and remote areas of New Zealand that do not have
many or any, hotel or motels.
In 2025, our host community welcomed over 3.3 million
guests, to New Zealand. In 2024,
Airbnb guests who stayed across the country spent an estimated
$4.4 billion on accommodation and non-accommodation
expenses, supporting more than 33,000 jobs,
according to research by Oxford Economics.
And guests in short-term accommodation spend money in local cafes, in
restaurants, shops, transport services and, and visitor
attractions as well. And this, of course, directs tourism dollars into
local communities, that may not have otherwise benefit from, from
tourism. Hosting also supports Kiwi
households. In a recent survey of Airbnb hosts in New
Zealand, almost 40% said the income from hosting
helps them to stay in their home, and this shows that short-term accommodation
provides meaningful support for many households.
For, for so many Kiwis, hosting isn't merely a side activity, but
it's a practical way to manage rising living costs and service mortgage
repayments, particularly for first home buyers and also owner
occupiers. And given these benefits, it, it is important that
overly restrictive or inconsistent regulations don't
unnecessarily limit responsible hosting.
Doing so could undermine a valuable source of income for Kiwi households and
also reduce the flow of tourism revenue that supports local businesses
and local communities.
Um, and as I mentioned, the current fragmented system creates significant
administrative burdens for local councils who are currently
interpreting, enforcing, and updating complex and differing
short-term accommodation rules.
The Queenstown District Plan review litigation, for example,
lasted over six years and is a clear example of how fragmented
regulation can lead to lengthy disputes, costly legal
proceedings, uncertainty for, for all
stakeholders, and substantial use of council
resources. A clear and national framework that
focuses on better enabling short-term accommodation and reducing the re-
requirements for resource consents for certain activities
would reduce the need for litigation, streamline compliance, and allow
councils to focus their resources on more pressing planning priorities
such as enabling housing supply. Um, and so in
closing, we strongly support the objectives of the planning
bill. Establishing clear and consistent national rules for short-term
rentals would directly support those objectives by
reducing regulatory fragmentation, as I mentioned, improving
efficiency in the planning system, supporting economic
growth, and enabling responsible use of residential
property. Um, and as I've mentioned, this reform process
presents a unique opportunity to address New Zealand's approach to short-term
accommodation properly. Um, and we would welcome the opportunity to work
constructively with government on the development and drafting of the national
standards. Our goal is to work together to help get the
framework right the first time. Uh, but thank you very much,
for your time.
Look, thank you very much, Catherine, for that, submission.
It's, interesting to hear from short-term
rentals and accommodation, 'cause we haven't yet.
So you're the, the first one we've heard from in this perspective, in this
context. Uh, look, I'll ask a question, because there's
only a couple of amendments that you've got in your submission that you're kind of
asking for, and obviously one is to add a whole
clause in at Clause 46 or a
subsection. Um, and you've kind of outlined there,
and it's to do with the national instruments.
D- Can you just outline how that's actually going to impact you
or Airbnb and, and why that, that, that by adding
that, it's impactful and significant for you?
Yes. Thank you for the question. I will pass over to Louise Espin from Russell
McVeagh to, to address this one on, on my behalf.
Hi there. Can everybody hear me?
Yes, we can, Louise.
Brilliant. Um, so the intention is, so that would be a change to
Clause 46, which is the process for effectively making
national instruments. So the change that Airbnb is seeking in
the submission is to effectively enable a
process where key stakeholders would be involved in the
establishment of these national,
standards, national instruments.
So that would be pre-submission stage.
Mm.
That would be in the sort of drafting of and the, the,
the making of the instruments. Now, why that would be
beneficial, and in this case, for Airbnb, in the
case of a, a, a new national standard that is related to
the short-term rental activity, is that Airbnb would be
able to... And other providers such as Bookabach a- and,
and other relevant, key stakeholders, would then
have input into the drafting so that
operational issues, sort of real-life, on-the-ground
issues can be addressed at that kind of higher level prior to
it being drafted and then going to the submission stage.
Acknowledging that there would still be a, a sort of standard
submission process, but having that input up front
could be ben- would be beneficial for kind of key
organizations and reduce the need for that kind of t*t for tat down the
track.
Yeah. Okay. And so just a supplementary on that.
So key stakeholders, when you put that wording in there, that's obviously
not just targeted at Airbnb, but you're feeling that n- more
broadly, then there would be, more input.
Yes, that's right. And I suppose for this clause it would have to be
broad in order to apply to-
Yes. Yeah
... any, national standards. But yes, it would be relevant, relevant key
stakeholders relevant to the national instrument in question.
Okay. And so just, and just quickly off the back of that, that, so if you gave a,
a, a, as you say, an on-the-ground example, you kinda touched on a couple,
Catherine. But, like, if you were giving, you know, an, an example where
this perhaps could impact a lot of Airbnb,
a- accommodation.
In terms of an example of how Airbnb's input could sort of help from-
Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah
... level?
Like where... We... Yes. Yeah.
Yeah. So it would probably be if, if it was a, let's say a national standard,
so, like, national environmental standards we, we currently have,
it would be input into the, you know, rule framework that would,
ultimately then drop down to the, to the plans.
It would be input into the rule framework based on Airbnb's
experience with relevant districts and, and, you
know, district plan review processes around the
country so that a sort of appropriate framework was created
at that higher level.
But, but had Airbnb been involved in a lot of, resource
management, you know, planning in, in, you know, previously, like,
from your o- your umbrella organization, not just obviously the, the people
that have the houses?
Yes.
Okay. Yeah.
Yes. In- including I think Catherine made reference to the Queenstown
context. So, Airbnb was involved from the, the
earliest stage until resolving the appeal, six plus years
later. Um, Airbnb's been involved with, with Christchurch and
various other, other cities.
Yeah. Okay. Interesting. Thank you. Um, Grant's got a question.
Yeah. Thank you very much. Um, I must admit that was a great sell job on Airbnb.
I mean, it's...
Um, and, and it's a, it's a great opportunity for people to, as
a, you know, to make a few dollars or to an opportunity to rent
out, to rent out their houses. I do think you, you didn't mention the fact that
actually some of these people turn up and have big parties at these places.
So that, that sort of stuff would have to come in.
When you, so when you talk about rules and so forth, I think it's more than just a
quiet residential use of a property.
So I suppose that's all the sort of things you wanna, rules and stuff that you
wanna get consistent across the country when you, we, at, at why
you wanna set standard set of rules, so you don't wind up with those sorts
of, you, you know, bespoke rules in different parts of the country.
Makes it easier.
Yeah. We, we have a, a global party ban
policy. Um, so we just, we prohibit disruptive and unauthorized parties
in Airbnb listings on our platform.
Doesn't mean they don't happen.
Um,
there are consequences for those who attempt to, to violate these rules.
Uh, we, ranging from account sus- suspension to removal from
the platform. Um, and we are committed to promoting safe and responsible travel on
Airbnb and in local communities. And this includes taking steps to
help tackle those rare safety related incidents, like disruptive and
unauthorized parties, which aren't welcome on our platform by
our hosts or in the, in local communities in which we operate.
Um, and we continually invest in measures like technology and tools and
resources for hosts, law enforcement and neighbors
also, to help enforce our ban on disruptive parties and
deter isolated issues. Um, the vast majority of our
community are considerate neighbors and travelers, and we take action against
those, who violate our strict policies.
Um, and in terms of, of the planning bill, we see, this
opportunity for national consistency in the laws that apply, particularly from a
planning sense, that would provide clear settings for, for
hosts, guests, platforms, and also the broader community.
Yeah. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for your submission.
It appears we don't have any further questions.
But look, a really interesting perspective, and we appreciate the
time you've spent on putting this submission together, and, and we'll take on board
that feedback and those considerations, so thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
So moving on to our next submitter for
today, the Forest Owners Association
Can see you there, Elizabeth. Welcome-
Kia ora
... to the select committee this afternoon.
Um, you are very familiar with this process, so, we will hand it
over to you. Uh, obviously take your submission as read and, if you
talk us through the main points, and then we'll open up for questions.
Thank you.
Sounds great, thanks. Uh, kia ora koutou. I'm co-Elizabeth Hague, te hunga.
So I'm the CEO of Forest Owners Association.
Um, I'm gonna be joined today by Rachel Miller, who's our environment
manager, and we've also got beaming in from
Auckland, Jill Chapple and Trish Fordyce, who have been providing our
environment committee with legal support through the, um...
in case she throws any curve b***s through, through the, the question
time. So, so we'll just- we'll try to keep the
presentation, we've, we've tried to shorten it down so that we can have plenty of
time for discussion. Um, so look, Forest Owners Association,
as you all are, are familiar with, represents the majority of New Zealand's
production forestry estate, so that's, timber producers.
Um, so we've got approximately 1.2 million hectares by
area that are our members, employing, across the
forestry and wood supply chain just over 40,000
people, and we sequester about half of New Zealand's carbon
emissions. Forestry operates as a long-term cyclical land
use with distinctive and specific regulatory needs.
We rely on the health of the natural environment for our production, so these
bills are very important to us. Because investment in
forestry spans decades, forestry is highly sensitive to
regulatory certainty, consistency, and proportionality.
Regulatory settings must acknowledge the full production cycle, starting with
land preparation through decades of growth and
maintenance, through to harvesting and replanting.
Um, overall, we support the intent of the reforms and the funnel
approach. Um, our concern is that some of the
structural and design choices risk undermining and strea- the
streamlining intent of the reform, particularly for long rotation
land uses like forestry. We would like to as well
highlight, we attached to our submission a report that we commissioned from NZ
IER around the cost of compliance.
Um, look, I, I think the most important takeaway if,
if you read nothing else in that report, is that the design choices we make
here have a disproportionately large impact on small scale
operators, and we know that the forest industry is, is made
up of a lot of farm foresters. Um, and our submission was
joint with the Farm Forestry Association.
So, so just wanna highlight that one of our kinda key concerns today as we're
talking through this are those small grower
operators. Um, the continuation
of sector-specific national direction, is really
important for the forestry sector, and so the, the ability of this
legislation to enable that is critical to us.
Um, the national environmental standards for commercial forestry have
delivered national consistency.
They've embedded risk-based tools into regulation so that we
can manage the risks associated with, forestry
operations. Um, they've reduced the council by council
reinterpretation by standardizing some of the definitions and
the activities, and they've allowed regulatory effort to focus on
genuinely high-risk activities.
Um,
we, we really want to talk a little bit more about that because
the bills need to be very careful about
how they allow councils to depart from national
settings, and to avoid refragmenting forestry
regulation at a time when, we've got a lot of
uncertainty, both globally and domestically.
Um, with that, I might hand over to Jill to comment a little
further on some of those system design risks.
Uh, kia ora Elizabeth, kia ora to the committee.
Um, so in the forest industry submission, we highlight
concerns about duplication across the planning bill and the natural
environment bill, and really see this as a bit of a lost
opportunity to streamline some of those issues that we're currently
experiencing, with the RMA. So duplication
for forestry is really an issue, particularly for harvesting and
earthworks, essentially because these are simultaneously land
use activities and activities with environmental effects.
So under the current system, we've got unitary councils, and these generally tend
to operate more efficiently in this space.
Uh, it avoids the need for dual consenting, increased costs and
delays, a- and what we would really like to see is, is,
this reconciliation of the overlap, between these two
bills, ironed out here so that we have some more,
consistency. So currently we see that the bills
perpetuate the overlap of functions.
We're not clear about which act prevails to which part of an activity, which
council is responsible, or how consent duration and conditions may
well be determined. So I don't think that these, are
fatal. Uh, they can be, uh... there are some
solutions which we have attempted to identify in the submission.
Um, so for example, looking at, making it clear about
national direction and how that can be used to clarify overlap and functional
responsibility. Uh, and in particular, I think we would also
highlight, that support for the retention of the
NESCF as a tool to manage all of those activities
associated with forestry and, and, and that in itself substantially
assists with some of those overlap issues.
So I'm gonna pass over to Trish, to talk about activity
status.
We con- concerned about the loss of permitted and controlled
activity status. Um, in effect, the proposed permitted
activity process, it's, it's not a permitted
activity. What you're creating is a new consent
process. Refer you to Section 202 of the
NEA, which requires assessment by the council
of any lodged material.That's a consent process.
Section 38 of the PA and 39 of the
NEA, with all those requirements for registration, written
approval, certification, bonds, they're
actually creating an unquantified, costly, and
complex new process. Um, our report from
the NZ- EIR actually is probably the only
evidence out there as to the cost of a permitted activity
process with th- the monitoring that is included in
there. And if you read that, you'll see what those costs are actually
there, or are there, and that would be across the whole of New
Zealand, not just for any other rural land use, pastoral and
horticulture, but for all the urban area as well.
Um, so this creating a- another consent
process is kind of counterintuitive to the
intent of the reforms. We're then concerned also with the
loss of controlled activities. The NESCF
and other NESs do use controlled activities, but
sparingly. But they are there to provide
certainty, so that people can operate subject
to councils being able to assess specific,
local conditions. And for n- for most of
us, it's in forestry, it's the harvesting.
If you don't meet a permitted activity standard, you cascade to
controlled. But you have the certainty that you will
be, allowed, but subject to
conditions. And I do refer you to other individual
forestry companies which have supplied specific
examples of how controlled activities are actually working for
them, in New Zealand at this
stage.
Elizabeth, indigenous biodiversity, I think.
She's frozen.
Oh, we're trying to pop back to Elizabeth, who-
Oh
... seems to have frozen there.
It's okay. If we can't get her back, um-
We can do it
... we can talk to that.
Okay. No, she's popped back. She's popped off there, so do you just want to perhaps
talk to that?
Yeah, I think-
There we go. You're back again, Elizabeth.
Oh, here we go.
So they were just talking to you.
Yeah, sorry. Don't know what happened there. Our internet dropped out.
Okay. You... And,
so have you, you... A- are you now talking to another point there, or did you wanna
open up for questions? Elizabeth?
Oh, look, I think, where... Did you guys, um-
You're on it
... have you covered off indigenous biodiversity at this stage?
No. It's your turn.
We've missed that, no.
Okay. So just before we, before we go to
questions, I guess the, the, important to cover off that
the, the biodiversity value of plantation forest is often
misunderstood. Forestry is highly supportive of the net gain approach to
indigenous biodiversity and invests significantly in outcomes which generate
net gain. Um, the ec- ecological health limits
that are introduced is a new concept, and we just wanna get
some clarity around the, the workability of that.
Um, so for instance, you know, as a
former DOC employee, I know that there's a real lack of baseline data
across the motu for biodiversity.
So part of what we would like to understand is, how do we establish the
ecological baselines? Um, how would significant
natural areas be identified and, and mapped?
And our, our strong preference is for, spatial
identification. And then thinking about, dev-
developing that national consistency.
So treating biodiversity as both a goal and a limit creates some
uncertainty, and, we... we're also interested in
understanding more about the regulatory relief provisions
and how those are gonna be applied.
I guess there's some operational uncertainty around how that would all work, but
with the proviso that we're doing a lot of work in this space around net
gain. And so we're overall supportive, if we can get the settings to
work.
Um, with that, look, I'll just say, we can, we can
cover off a little bit in the conversation around environmental limits,
I think. Um, but, we really are looking for a
system that's nationally consistent, risk-based,
integrated across councils, and supportive of long-term investment.
With targeted amendments, we think the bills can strengthen environmental
protection and enable sustainable forestry that supports regional
economies and New Zealand's climate goals.
So with that, happy to open for questions.
Thank you, Elizabeth, and thank you all for your submission.
Um, obviously a very important industry and, you know, we're
mindful of these considerations, so thank you for the work you've put into
this submission. Um, we'll go first to Ryan Hamilton, who's
had his ques- hand up for a question.
Thanks, Chair. Thank, thanks, Elizabeth and team.
I just wanted to take a bit of a, a, a macro view.
You make some c- clear points throughout your submission, and obviously one of the
first points you raise is about the, NES on commercial forestry and
wanting to retain some of those existing provisions in terms of clarity
for your role. Um, so I guess my question is, had, have you got that at the
moment, given the, the flux of policy statements or the absence of
some? Um, and my other point, you talk
about it's pleasing to see the removal of the effects management
hierarchy, and that you're gonna get a much more proportionate,
potentially, way to mitigate, challenges in
that. So
putting with, just some context on those two points, and then just generally as
it sits at the moment, do you see this, the, the
legislation, helping your industry?
Or is it, is it still, is it sort of more, more of a
hindrance, putting aside, you know, your submissions on duplication and all those
sorts of things?
Yeah, so I might start at the back first and then, throw to
Jill to talk a- talk a little bit more.
Um, I think overall, like, uncertainty
in terms of long-term investment is, is really challenging.
Um, so for forestry, until we're clear
on how the bills handshake with each other and what the operating environment's
gonna be, we're, we're kind of i- in the same place that we have
been in. Um, and from an international perspective,
when you look-- I've, I've had foresters from Australia say their experience when
they had a n- a national planning bill and an environment bill is if the
crosstalk's not, not m- managed effectively,
then i- the consenting is still really, really difficult.
Yeah.
Um, and, and I think the, the issue with that is you're not necessarily getting
any better environmental performance for a lot m- more bureaucracy.
So it's thinking about how do we get that certainty in
place. Um, in, in terms of the design of, of the
national direction, I, I think just to clarify our comments, one of the
things we really like with the current national direction is that the, the
risk cascade through an activity as you would undertake them in the
forest. So where there are connected activities, those risks
have a belts and braces approach to management,
for, for lack of a better analogy.
So, so functionally, when we talk about the crossover with earthworks
between the two bills, I guess the concern is, you know, w- we've
seen that, that earthworks are something that's being impacted by climate
change and in some regions is a higher risk activity.
Uh, having a lack of clarity about how that's gonna operate or how
you are gonna manage that between the two bills is actually
probably one of the riskiest areas for us, and that's why activities
like that, we're really looking for some clarification
about w- what the enabling overarching legislation's gonna be
because at a regulatory level, we need th- those to be really clear and
have a really clear risk-based approach to management.
Yeah.
Um, Jill, is there anything else you-
Thank you. And I'll just say that-
So I was just gonna touch on your question, about the effects management
hierarchy. Uh, we were pleased to see it removed from the
bill because it had previously been in the NBAA, which is not to
say that it doesn't have a place within the national direction, it's just that it
seems to us that there is, a greater amount of flexibility to
determine, where it appropriately sits within
specific national direction rather than having it, you
know, sitting right in the middle of the legislation
itself.
Yeah. Yeah. So it's instead of making it more nuanced, instead of having
it as a default-
That's correct
... regulation. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. Look, we'll go to Lann Farm now.
Sorry, my video keeps on popping off. There we go, Lann.
E nga koutou, thanks f- so much for your submission.
Um, I wanted to bring up an example that
h- that has caused some alarm with a number of
submitters when it comes to regulatory relief, and this
was, some comments that the minister for RM
Reform made on radio where he said, in
the example where, for example, up in,
Tairāwhiti, the council might be seeking
to put more stringent controls on forestry up
there, that that council m- may
be subject to paying forestry companies f-
regulatory relief for basically putting those rules in
place. Now, I wanted to ask you about that, but I'm noting that you
were more coming with questions about regulatory relief and
how it might work. So I, I'd like to hear more
from, you about how you think that
could work in practice and sort of what the different
issues or ideals would be from your point of view.
Elizabeth, do you want me to deal with that?
Uh, yeah, you can start off, and then I, I think I'm happy
to come in at the end. So yep, go ahead and have a first crack.
Yeah, look, I think, the first thing with regulatory relief is, is we're
not clear about when it's actually going to apply.
Uh, and I think that, that one of the fundamental issues is
that if there is already a control that arises in
relation to land, just because there's new national direction, isn't
going to change that situation which means that there's gonna be a lack of
eligibility for regulatory relief anyway.
Our, our overall view is that, when we look at it, we see
that there's actually very little application, for these
provisions in a forestry context.
Yeah. So just to add to that, I think
when, when we talk, I think per- perhaps,
s- subsequent to the minister's comments, some things have got conflated
in the discussion around this. So, so first of all, like,
that's, that discussion around regulatory relief in Tairāwhiti, I
think what's got conflated there is we are having discussions about
concerns that we've got about the ETS liabilities for land use
transition in Tairāwhiti. That, that's an immediate concern.
That's not a concern with these bills.
Is that where we, we are going to need to transition possibly
20 to 30% of some forestry areas, into,
a different forest type, we've, we're gonna have to work with
the government on what the ETS liabilities are there and how
we might deal with some of those issues where, where ultimately that
is gonna get transitioned into native forest.
That's a very different conversation to regulatory relief, and I think
unfortunately those two things ended up getting conflated
in, in some of the discussions in the national media.
Yeah.
Thank you. Um, look, I, I just had a further question around the
permitted activity because it does come up quite a lot,
in the submissions, and you've made
a recommendation. Um, just in terms of
as it stands at the moment, how do you see it,
being-... playing out in practice.
You know, like in terms of the types of activity that we'd
be seeing on the ground in the forestry industry.
Well, one of the first things I think is important to say about permitted
activities that I think is common- a commonly misheld
perception is that permitted equals
permissive.
Mm.
So, so in order to undertake a permitted activity, you have to
meet a range of criteria, and actually in, in a lot of cases
our foresters will go ahead and seek consent where there's any
uncertainty just to make sure that they're sweet with the
council and that they're managing their risk effectively.
Um, the, the range of permitted activities that we've currently
got in the NESCF kind of fall across the
activity landscape. Um, I might throw to
Jill and Trish on if there's any particular permitted activity
examples they, they think would be useful to talk about in terms of
how we operate in the forest.
The earthworks is a really, a good one in
that the duplications district councils and regional
councils was got rid of. In the NESCF, it's made really
clear that we're permitted with regard to
TAs, but with regard to, regional council
functions, there's a cascade of the permitted
activities through to, restricted discretionary.
And the permitted activities, what people forget in forestry, is that
there is a mapping of erosion susceptibility.
And so the risk and the level of concerns are
different across those different, zones.
So red zone ones are really tough and ri- erosion
areas. Um, there are no very limited permitted
activities for earthworks. But in yellow and green zones
there is permission and but subject to you still have
to supply, management plans,
notification management plans, and you're still monitored and
audited. So they've, they've set the thresholds at
different levels depending on the risk, the
erosion risk, and the risk to the environment, and that's how that's
working for, for earthworks.
Okay. But I'm just, but well I suppose the question was that under the
current bills, in terms of the permitted activity, where
obviously the whole intent is to enable more permitted
activity, but, um-
Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah
... I suppose, I suppose like it, it, yeah, I'm
not quite understanding it from the forestry
perspective. Right.
It wouldn't, it wouldn't happen, it wouldn't be enabled-
Yeah
... because for the regional council functions, which
is land u- at the moment, and appears we don't quite know how the
duplication's going to work out, but if you have, if earthworks
are considered a regional council functions where there's an
effect on the environment, in other words a discharge of sediment to
land which could get to water, then the
permitted activity is in effect a consent.
Because-
Right
... you, every bit of material that you put in is going to be assessed by the
council. So first off, that whole permitted
activity process for us, has actually
been ratcheted up to, a resource consent process.
Yeah.
So that's one, one-
That, that's what I suspected. I just, yeah, no, that makes sense. Thank you.
Okay.
Um, Grant, time for one last question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, yeah, just a question.
You, you ta- mentioned about significant natural areas, how you'd like them
to be, clearly identified, because it would just make everyone's life a
bit easier. Do you have any issues or any commentary, I haven't been able to find
anything about outstanding natural landscapes or any issues in that
space?
Um, the... Can I answer it, Elizabeth?
Basically, the outstanding natural landscapes hasn't
overly affected, affected us, because it
exists now. Um, high amenity areas,
we, do agree with the bill, getting rid of
those. The, because it's highly
subjective and it's really, it's not
a protection issue.
Mm.
Outstanding natural landscapes is, is, is sitting up there with
SNAs and the others. It's, it's something that's really to be
protected.
Yeah, and you haven't, it hasn't, posed any issues for
forestry companies where, for example, they then wanna harvest and someone's
overlaid it with an ONL?
No. Well, I mean, in our case it's covered in trees, Grant, so it's-
Yeah
... yeah.
Yeah, but you gotta harvest them unfortunately, that's, you know, at, at that sense
and some people might... I'm just, h- you haven't struck issues where
people, because obviously the harvesting process, you, you scar the
landscape for a period of time. There'd be no issues there?
No, not, not that I've, not that I've encountered.
Okay. Great.
Um, and I think, I guess, I guess just to highlight, we do have,
a number of QEII, national co- the covenants
in the national forestry estate. Um, and, and
with those, I think some of those may be classed as outstanding natural
landscapes-
Mm
... but they're managed within the context of the forest.
Right.
And there's all the sensitivities around the, the
edge effects around that and all those kind of things when you, when you're gonna
undertake an activity, so. Um, but yeah, I don't, I don't think
generally we've, we've had too many issues with that.
Right. Okay.
Saying that, somebody'll come up with something after you've mentioned this now,
so.
Look-
Okay. Sorry
... thank you very much, for your submission today.
We have met time. Um, we appreciate all the work that you've done on the
submission. Certainly a lot to consider, in there.
So, appreciate your time. Thank you.
Thank you.
Sure thing. Thank you.
So we now move on to our next submitter, Wellington
Water.
Just, yeah, there we go. Yep.
Just, just take that cross off it. Yeah, that's true.
Oh, we can hear you. There we go. Welcome.
Hello. We can see you and hear you. Uh, welcome to the Select Committee this
afternoon.
Thanks for having us.
You have twenty minutes with us.
Okay.
So, look, take your submission as read, but we'll hand it over
to you to talk us through, your submission, and then we'll
open up for questions.
Tena koutou katoa. Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak
today. Uh, my name is Stephen McArthur, Chief
Strategy and Planning Officer at Wellington Water, and on my
right, probably your left, with me is, Catherine
Wistowick, Head of, Resource Management and
Environment. So, just a little bit of background about
Wellington Water. Currently operate the three networks,
on behalf of three waters networks on behalf of Wellington,
Porirua, Hutt, Upper Hutt City Councils and South Wairarapa District
Council in Greater Wellington Regional Council.
These, councils own and fund water infrastructure in the
region and task us to deliver water, services for
them. We're currently responsible for capital delivery
projects for all these councils except South Wairarapa.
Obviously, from, one July this year, the landscape changes.
Uh, Wellington Water, transitions into Te Āki Wai, which
is the metropolitan Wellington region's new, water
service provider. Importantly, unlike
Wellington Water, Te Āki Wai will own the three water assets and
be responsible for making funding decisions about how to fund and invest
in the important infrastructure.
So we're here today because, the Planning Bill and Natural Environment
Bill will shape how we plan, build, operate, and
upgrade our essential water infrastructure.
So why does this matter? As, discussed by Wellington,
NZ this morning, three waters infrastructure is
lifeline infrastructure. It underpins housing
growth, public health, environmental protection,
economic productivity, and climate resilience.
Due to its linear nature and the need to service individuals and
business, water infrastructure is located in a broad range
of environments. Key activities, include
abstraction of water for drinking water supply and stormwater and wastewater
discharges. So given, this context,
activities we carry out significantly are affected
by environmental regulation.
So, Wellington Water broadly supports the streamlined approach to
plan making and consenting proposed by the bills,
because speeding up plan making and consenting processes
will enable
us to make improvements to our three waters infrastructure, that's
including abstraction and discharges, in a more cost-effective
way. I'm going to hand over to, Cat
to make the, remaining points.
Thanks, Stephen. Um, so Wellington Water supports the recognition
generally that is given to infrastructure provided by the bills.
Um, however, we note that currently the Natural Environment Bill lacks an
infrastructure goal, and even though it regulates key
activities such as water abstraction and wastewater and stormwater
discharges, Wellington Water is therefore seeking an infrastructure
goal is added to, the Natural Environment Act.
Um, national instruments, under the new regime are going to
heavily shape how the new planning regime is going to operate,
which we support. Um, however, given the
significance of those, instruments for the operation of the system,
we're seeking that there is earlier involvement from the water sector in the
development of those instruments, as well as the further
opportunity to comment on recommendations following initial
submission periods to, to ensure that decision-makers are best
informed, about the needs of the water sector as
they are making those important documents that will highly regulate how
we will operate. Um, we also consider that
there is a strong need for integration with the performance
standards made by Taumata Arowai.
Both bills refer to the relationship between these,
these standards, so in particular, the wastewater and stormwater environmental
performance standards, which Taumata Arowai will make.
Um, and, and there's a need for integration with the planning documents that
will be developed under the new system.
Uh, so therefore, we're asking for stronger integration and, and stronger
discussion between Taumata Arowai and, Ministry for the
Environment and or, any councils and so on to make sure
that the system is workable. Um,
alignment of water service strategies and spatial planning is also a key
focus of our submission. We are supportive of
regional spatial plans. We think that is an excellent idea.
However, we consider that water service providers need to be
proactively involved in the formation of those documents, and
that those documents are aligned with water service strategies, and water service
strategies are essentially like, long-term
plans. Um, these water service strategies will
set out infrastructure priorities, including strategic matters
around areas where infrastructure should be delivered to support growth
and, significant forecasting of assumptions and
risk. There is a need for strong relationships between spatial
plans and water service strategies, as water s- infrastructure is a key
requirement to enable growth. Without this,
growth may enable-- be enabled in areas where infrastructure cannot
realistically or affordably be delivered.
And I think as WaterNZ said this morning, we are important
infrastructure to enable growth.
Um, we want to make sure that infrastructure investment is planned in the
right part of the city, and is aligned with growth
plans.We therefore recommend that early involvement of water
providers in spatial planning, is provided for and
a requirement is introduced so that there's greater alignment between,
regional spatial plans and water service strategies.
Um, our submission sets out detail in, in relation to quite a number of
other matters, and, we're happy to answer any questions that you
may have for us, and thank you for the time, given to us to present to you
all today.
Look, thank you very much for that thorough submission.
Um, obviously a lot gone into it, so I appreciate all your feedback.
Uh, look, we will go to Grant McCullum for the first
question.
Yeah. Um, good afternoon. Uh, thank you very much for this.
Um,
you talk about here in your, the, um...
You would, like the, deletion of the, of the 35-year cap on
land use consents, w- it, which seems obvious.
What, what, what costs, what, what constraints and costs are in
po- occurred because, y- you know, the, of the
35-year consent, and what, and what would be an, a alternative way to approach it
all?
It, it's not clear to us why the 35-year cap was put on land
use consents. Land use consents generally run with the land under the current
RMA-
Mm
... approach, and so it's not clear to us why that was
put in for activities associated with wastewater and stormwater
performance standards. Um, what that would create is
significant investment uncertainty and, you know, when we're
talking about a wastewater treatment plant, it may need to be
located in its location much longer than 35 years, for
example. Um, even if it needs to be upgraded during that
time, the, the fu- You don't really go moving
wastewater treatment plants around without significant planning.
So, so that's the concern that, that we have.
Um, it wasn't clear what the policy intent was behind the
introduction of that, time limit.
Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. That, that's, uh...
So ultimately, effectively, you're looking for a system whereby
recognizes the exceptionally long,
long life of these, of these, of these assets.
Ye- yes, exactly. Um, our assets, can span
multi-decades, so we need to have that certainty.
Um, they're expensive assets that are paid for u- by our
communities and, and need to deliver now and into the future.
Thank you.
Julianne Genter.
Thank you for your submission. Um, I had a couple of questions, just
related to natural hazards and climate change in your written
submission on page 15, and stormwater on page 16.
Um, you note that there's no goal relating to climate change itself, nor
is it a defined term. But I'm just wondering, do you think it should be
included in the bill? Should we have a goal related to climate change?
Um, and should the, you know, should it be defined?
Um, and then secondly, you've referred to higher rainfall events and
the consequences of that, but there's no reference to, like,
natural infrastructure or green infrastructure.
Um, we have heard from some other submitters,
that maybe natural infrastructure should be included in
the definition of infrastructure, pr- and that
specifically referring to, nature-based solutions,
for water management. And just wondering if there's any reason why
that's omitted from your submission or, yeah, I mean, do you see a role for
natural infrastructure in, coping with larger
volumes of larger rainfall events?
Um, so in terms of climate change, as, as you pointed out, that's, that's
discussed in, in our submission in some detail,
and, while there is a goal relating to natural
hazards, there isn't one for climate change.
And, and as we provide stormwater services,
sometimes the, the increased rainfall won't reach a threshold
whereby it's a, an, a hazard, and so...
but it will still need to be addressed.
So we can see that there is a need to recognize and provide for climate
change through these bills. Um, in terms of
your second statement around, nature-based
solutions, I've worked in the RN sector for
quite some time and, it's not always quite clear
what is meant when, when people are talking about nature-based solutions.
I think it can mean different things to different people.
I think they absolutely serve a, an excellent purpose
and, they are important for particularly managing
stormwater. Um, but we just
need to make sure that we're clear what we mean when we say nature-based
solutions, and that there's a clear understanding.
Um, if it's not included in... If it's included in the bills, I think that needs to
be really, really clear. Um, however, if it's
not, I suspect that it will come in through lower order planning
documents anyway. But again, I still see that there is that need for, for
clarity in terms of what we mean.
Look, thank you. Uh, we'll go to Ryan Hamilton now for a
question.
Thanks, Chair. Um, thanks Wellington Water for your
submission. Look, I know you, you make a point about
wanting to be recognized as a designated authority.
We have had this from some other submitters today.
But being cynical, given the issues that you've recently
seen or experiencing firsthand with your waters
infrastructure, wouldn't it be prudent to have another layer
of checks and balances in terms of
rigor?
So Tiaki Wai from the 1st of July will become a requiring
authority. Um, it will, and, and so we, we've sort of
put this in, this submission point in for, the water
sector more broadly, to seek that water service providers
are designating authorities under the new regime.
Um, it-
Councils are automatically designating authorities.
So where you've got water services being provided by a council, they will
be able to, seek designations.
And so I'm not sure why you'd draw a distinction between councils and, and other
water service providers, we're all publicly...
all, all of these entities will be publicly owned.
Um, and, and I just note as well that not all of our
activities will be, able to be designated.
So I understand under this new regime as well,
designations will provide for land use, for example, of our treatment
plants, but the discharges from our wastewater treatment plants would still need to
be consented under the Natural Environment Act.
Okay. Thanks for that clarification.
Look, thank you very much. It appears we have no further
questions. But look, we appreciate, your submission
and, your time on this, so thank you.
Thanks very much.
Thanks.
So we now move on to our next submitter
for the day, who we have ready to go Te Uru
Kahika. Welcome. Oh, Dion, we
see you again.
You're, you're a regular throughout the, the submission
process with different hats.
Yes, there's very many different hats and thank you, Madam Chair, and,
thanks again- ... for, allowing us to, to present to the,
s- the select committee on this very important, bill.
And, and, and as you can see, I've been in a, a various few different hats and
you can see the cross intersection that that has, on all the different
parts of local government. Uh, so, and I can see, I
can see my mate there, Grant, lurking as well. So good to see you again, Grant.
Um, I just wanted to say again thank you and int- introduce
on the, call with me, next to me, I have Stefanie Rietscher, who
is, the Canterbury Regional Council Chief Executive.
Uh, we'll have Jonathan, Gibbard, who is the North, Northland
Regional Council, Chief Executive, and Al Cross, who is the
Director of RM Systems for Te Uru Kahika.
Uh, and we're Te Uru Kahika, the collective voice of New Zealand's
unitary and, regional councils.
Uh, we've heard strong, you've heard strong support for the
reform, and we echo that at a, a high principle
level. Uh, but we do acknowledge that there are a number of points that have
already been raised, by the Te Uru Kahika councils that you have,
most likely heard. But today what we're going to do is target things,
that matter most to the sector, what must change
for, these bills to be implementable, durable, trusted,
and, have that longevity that I think everybody is
wanting. Uh, we're gonna focus on the system level
matters, including system risk, reform foundations, enabling
spatial planning, interests and transition challenges,
summarizing our position in the following headline messages, which are first that
we support the reform, but implementation risk is high
unless alignment between separate reforms and sequencing,
is improved. Uh, secondly, the foundation of the system,
the goals, climate resilience, Treaty of Waitangi obligations
need strengthening. And third, the targeted amendments to the
bills, will materially improve the outcomes and
reduce cost and potential litigation, into the future.
And so on that note, I will hand over to Jono, who is going to,
go through the system risk alignment, sequencing and capacity.
Uh, Jono.
Have we got a, have we got a Jono on board? No.
It looks like Jono's having a bit. So what we'll do is we'll go straight into,
Stefanie. Um, Stefanie will talk about regional
spatial plannings and, what must change in that space.
So we'll, we'll go straight into that part.
Kia ora koutou. Thank you so much, select committee and Madam Chair.
Um, I'm gonna speak on two matters and the first one regards regional spatial
planning. Um, and first and foremost, I just wanna highlight
our ask in terms of regional spatial planning.
Uh, we will be looking for, and it is in our submission, to have extended time
frames to guarantee governance and to hardwire
integration and strengthen status, and I'm going to speak about those.
But before I do, Madam Chair, I'd just like to highlight we are in full support of
regional spatial planning. We think this is a very good idea.
It is the backbone of the new system, and we want it to work really
well. So please take our comments today in the context of how we think
things can, be delivered well for the country.
Um, we understand the desire to get regional spatial plans in quickly,
completely understand that, and recognize that it was felt that the last
time, the, the acts came through that it was too
long. But the time frames for spatial planning as proposed are too
compressed, and it risks low quality outcomes and
unintended consequences. Partly that has to do with the
resources across the country, and we are seeing some
members, some staff, being shifted into
private enterprise, whereby these things might cost more to the ratepayer and
taxpayer than we would otherwise like.
So having a phased approach would be wise.
Our recommendation is about six extra months,
and that would allow a little bit more phasing, and being able to work in
those compressed time, timelines.
We wanna balance expedient delivery and critical availability of the
expertise nationally, and we need to prepare for robust first
generation plans. We're cognizant these have a 10-year timeframe.
They could be called in sooner, but every time they are, there's an increased cost
to the country in a number of ways. So that's why we're highlighting this.
And we recommend that the core environmental limits be in place at the
outset, rather than them being iterative or confused later
on.The second point I wish to make is just regarding, not
just, but regarding governance arrangements.
They matter greatly to us, and regional councils must
have guaranteed representation on spatial planning
committees. They are the ones that have held the expertise to date.
They have the talent in the country, and they can provide a much more sound and
secure delivery. And should-- And they should be the default
secretariat, in our view, unless all councils agree
otherwise. It makes good sense from both scale and regional
coverage perspectives to be able to do it in that way.
We'd also like to highlight that we'd like to fix integration and legal status.
In particular, transport, water services, emergency
management, and clime adapt- climate adaptation must all align
with spatial plans. In so many ways, these become the national
security of the country, and stitched together the regional plans will
enable us to be a safer, secure, and indeed
prepared for development nation as we go forward.
The regional spatial plan should be given effect to in long term and other
statutory plans, not merely taken into account.
I know many listeners may not understand, but given effect to is a much higher
level and is something that we really wish to see in the
legislation. The second area I wanted to discuss
is the transition cost and regulatory relief, and Madam Chair, I am aware that
you've heard quite a lot already on this matter.
I'll just try to keep it focused. We recognize and support the government's
desire for rapid implementation. No doubt about that.
We do think that a c- transition could be costly and
complex through into the early twenty-thirties if some of the things I've
noted before aren't considered. Considering the sequencing
to reduce the strain on the workpo- force capacity is really important.
We'd like to minimize those bottlenecks.
Managing the consenting pressures with a mixed and nuanced approach to c-
consent extensions, and staggering of extent and
expiries to avoid workload spikes and the ability to review
extended consents. In other words, think through how we might stagger
those consents rather than having the whole nation come up at the same
time and again create those bottlenecks for the
resourcing. In the context of regulatory relief,
this is the area of our clearest warning.
We think it creates open-ended fiscal risk.
It undermines national direction, environmental limits, and
treaty obligations. And quite concerningly, it
incentivizes councils not to protect values, and I
don't think that's the intention of the bills before us.
So our ask in this space is to remove regulatory relief from the bills and
consider separately or at minimum exclude the
application to environmental limits, treaty matters, and national
direction. Don't apply it to the fast-track process and fund
compensation nationally. I'll leave it to that.
There may be others who want to chime in.
Yeah. So I'm just gonna see if, Jono-- Is Jono online?
Um-
Kia ora. Can you hear me now, Chair?
Yeah, I can. So just go straight into your, into your part there, Jono.
Yeah, ka pai. Apologies for that. Uh, yeah, I'll be speaking to system
risk alignment, sequencing, and capacity.
Uh, as you'll be aware from our submission, regional government supports
change. However, the sta- stacking of reforms,
represents a significant risk for the suc- successful implementation
of the reform. Resource management is occurring alongside
simplifying local government, rates capping, water services,
emergency management, and climate adaptation reforms.
Together, these create compounding pressure on councils,
confused accountability for communities, workforce fatigue, and risk
of loss of institutional knowledge.
We need to ensure that separate legislative reforms will be well
connected to enable clear, efficient, and unhindered
transit- transition of the new RM system.
Otherwise, its implementation could be undermined.
The new RM system re- relies heavily on the concept of the funnel
working. If national policy direction is not in place early, the
funnel, being national policy direction followed by spatial planning,
then regulatory plans, becomes, becomes
unstable. Our ask is to treat
legislative alignment as a non-negotiable system design issue
that must be careful- carefully considered now rather than
an implementation or transitional matter to be addressed
later. Enable the funnel, approach to work
by ensuring well thought through core national policy direction is
in place prior to spatial planning commencing and providing
sufficient time for spatial plans to give effect to national
direction. The second point, I quickly wish to
talk about is system foundations, goals, climate, and Te
Tiriti. The goals in the two bills are not yet strong or
aligned enough. The planning bill lacks explicit nat-
natural environmental goals, creating uncertainty about how
regional spatial plans give effect to environmental
outcomes. Climate change is
insufficiently embedded across both bills, a point also made
by many submitters. Incorporating adaptation, resilience, and
natural hazard con- consequences is
critical. A durable system must also deliver Te
Tiriti equivalent obligations across the system.
It is critical that iwi and hapū are enabled to participate fully in the
new system. The new act must not take a step backwards from the
commitments enshrined under the current Resource Management Act.
Without an equivalent, overarching Te Tiriti
duty, there is real risk to the settlement redress and reduced
Māori participation. Our ask is to strengthen
and align goals across both bills, to embed climate
resilience more clearly, and to provide system-wide Te Tiriti
provisions delivering an equivalent effect to the RMA Sections six and
eight. Kia ora koutou.
Uh, Kia ora, thanks, Jono. So just, just to close up, we really do want to
emphasise that we support the, the reforms and the way that they
are, intended, but we want to make sure they work, and that they
endure, and we urge the government to work with us to implement them.
Uh, changes that we've highlighted are about making the system work in
practice. You've got
a lot of regional councils who have a lot of experience here, to...
in working with the RM system, and the last thing that I want to do is that we're
coming from, coming at this with the perspective that we want to make sure that
this works for all of our communities, whether that's business sector,
environment, iwi, you name it, it needs to work for all of us,
all of those communities that we serve.
So over to you, Madam Chair, for, questions.
Look, thank you very much for that submission.
Um, obviously some familiar points that you've raised there as well.
There is obviously some common themes coming through from your regional
councils as well a- across the country.
Um, but look, we've got a few questions.
So we'll go, first to Lan.
Oh, tena koutou. Thank you so much for another excellent
submission. Um, I just wanted to pick up specifically
on, you raised the point about
the
environmental limits being tied to
life-supporting capacity, and
you're saying that they should actually be tied to ecosystem health, and I
assume you're meaning that life-supporting capacity
is m- maybe too low of a bar, but I'd like to hear, what the rationale
is with that. Thank you.
Stephanie, do you wanna say something to that?
Uh, kia ora. Uh, Lan, thank you so much for the question.
I think the, the differences between public health in human
and the ecosystem health of other species, and those
are the questions around environmental health and being very clear about those.
I think that's how our submission went about
this.
Thank you. Uh, Ryan Hamilton has a
question.
Oh, thanks, Chair. Um, I was just trying to find the point in your submission.
Um, you're obviously quite strongly opposed to the regulatory
takings piece. Um, we have seen some examples over the last
few days where... I mean, obviously you address
potential financial liabilities for councils, but it can be done
in a way which is quite nuanced, whereby it could be rates relief or
other forms of, compensation, n- not
necessarily f- or always financial or not necessarily cash
out. And I, and I appreciate we've got to flesh that out a bit more.
But can you concede that there could be some value or there
needs to be a little bit of, I guess, pause from what was seen in
some councils across the country where they've just, sort of carte
blanche drawn areas on a map that have had
real and impactful changes on property
owners? And that could be heritage.
I mean, you touch on-
Yeah
... sites of signifi- significance for Māori, but, there are other
areas as well.
Yeah, Ryan, I think, from the Canterbury Regional Council perspective, we said
in our submission as well that we, we, are saying that there are
different mechanisms, as you pointed out.
The QEII, example is one that we used.
I think the big point here is that there ne- you said it yourself, you need to
flesh this out a little bit, recognising exactly what you said, but
there are perverse outcomes to potentially what is written in the legislation, so I
think there needs to be a better, before this becomes the law,
it probably needs to be fleshed out a little bit more before you actually make it
the law, because there are a lot of perverse outcomes here.
You, you don't want it to go from where it is now to way over here, which is the
yo-yo effect of the RM systems that we've been hearing for some time.
So that I... We don't necessarily have the answers, and you've probably heard a
number of those, but there are some very, very, big risks in this
if you don't get it right.
Appreciate that. Uh, it's just that in your submission, one of your, one of your
positions was to get rid of it completely.
But what I'm, what I'm hearing is you are open to, you know, a bit more nuance
around how it might be a workable solution.
Yeah, if I might just add, for us it's as well in the context of
other reforms. So if you put rates capping in and then you also add rates
relief, and you have a fast track process that isn't
necessarily a decision-making process of those councils, then the
relief, it, it does have perverse outcomes unless it's fairly
clearly thought out.
Mm-hmm.
And I think if it is clearly thought out or directed, then that would be
useful.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. And Grant McCallum.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, g'day, Jono.
Good-
Yeah, kia ora, Grant
... to see you, mate. Um, question, it's, it's around,
I, I,
I asked, I asked, I think I asked Dion this at the Canterbury Regional Council,
but it goes,
in the whole, treaty settlement process and the,
and the engagement with, iwi and hapū, how do you
see it best fitting into the system?
So because I get concerns from, say, in my case
and around the country, some farming families are having to deal directly
at, w- when they do go for consents with hapū and iwi.
Uh, would, would it not be better to potentially have it at the higher level so
that you haven't got that level of complexity at each consent
level?
Jono, do you have something you want to say to this?
Yeah, I, I, I can make a contribution to this one.
Yeah.
Yeah, kia ora, Grant. Um, I, I think one of our, our submission points,
in there is that,
the, the, the proposed changes that are there is that there's, more
involvement or the, there's, the involvement for iwi and hapū is at the,
strategy setting and plan setting stage and reduced,
involvement at the, resource consenting stage.
One, one of the, one of the concerns though as well is that, with
the removal of the provisions from the RMA in sections five
through, eight, there's no equivalent, Te Tiriti
provisions in there that provide that overarching high,
uh-Um, expectation of partnership, with
councils through that process, where iwi and hapū are more treated just
as a- another stakeholder to consult with.
Uh, so I think, yeah, it's, it's been reduced at both levels, both at the
consenting level, but then also at the plan preparation level.
So one of our key points is if you are gonna have your funnel process and
more involvement at the front end, you need to have your same s-
level of, opportunity for partnership and, and participation as in the
current, the current RM regime.
Does that answer your question?
Yeah, it does, but would it... I mean, 'cause it, it strikes me as if you can get
the, the, the framework right, then there's...
and I mean, there'll be specific exam- ex- examples that are different.
But where f- for people like the consent to farm or just
someone to consent to a sub, a small subdivision or something, I mean,
having to... it's that continual, that extra
lev- extra engagement level at that point with, with iwi
and hapū at that stage, is, is that gonna be...
you know, does that just create another, level of bureaucracy and
uncertainty that, that, you know, the average, say, the average,
small business doesn't need or c- or struggle to cope
with?
If I can keep going, Dion. I, I-
Yeah
... I, I think there's a, a balance on the significance-
Mm
... of the activity that's being undertaken.
Yeah. Yeah. Mm.
Uh, and, and some, discussion around, where that
balance sits on the significance of the activity.
But, if you only provide for p- specific provision at the plan
setting stage, there are... th- that can't take in, into account
all of the specific nuances of when it come, actually comes to a resource consent
at place. There's always gonna be specific nuances at place
for iwi and hapū, and the significance of a site, or the impact of an
activity that you can't just have their involvement at the front end of the
process. But yes, I, I do take your point that, the
level of engagement and, participation in the
process also needs to be proportionate to the degree and significance of the
activity being undertaken.
Yeah. Thank you.
Uh, and Julie-Anne Genter has been waiting patiently for a
question.
Tēnā koutou. Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I had a really specific que- question about the points on transport
planning integration. Um, in paragraph 118,
you have some specific recommendations around amending the Land Transport
Management Act to require the GPS to be consistent with an
RSP. Um, and I'm just interested in
which is the direction of hierarchy.
So is it... And I probably agree with this if...
I just want to clarify if it's what you're suggesting, that actually it's a more
bottom-up approach, that the RSPs are developed and the GPS
is taking, is required to be consistent with those rather than the
other way around.
Uh, Al, are you on, are you online, Al?
I certainly am, Dion.
This might be very specific for you to answer. It'd be good. Thank you.
Yes. Um, I, I can answer that one. Thanks,
Julie-Anne. So
I think it's probably best to look at this in terms of sequence.
So you develop your regional spatial plan, wi- with a
view to ensuring that you've got the, got the consistent approach and
legal weight that's a, that's applied by, by
other, acts and, and documents that
plug into the regional spatial planning.
Now, further down the track, as you develop, new GPSs, for
instance, then the legal weight that's required then simply has to plug
in. So they are then developed
with, with the sense of understanding the requirements within each of those
regional spatial plans. So it's probably more, I think, a sequencing until you
actually get, the adjustments we're asking for to,
transport related,
legislation, you've g- you've got to then start to do that in
sequence. Does that make sense?
Thank you. Look, we-
No, just, just one second. Can I just say-
Yeah
... just on that point, I just wanted to make that that is one of the biggest
bugbears from transport planning point of view within a regional council sense.
So it would be really useful for us to, to consider that because it is a,
um... you've got a, a number of layers of planning that really don't
work well together. So we do our planning, and then NZTA does their planning, and
then the GPS comes out, and they do their planning, and then if you add
the higher level, regional spatial planning planning on top of
that, the sequencing of all four of those need to be in align so
that you're not... y- your budget's also aligned.
It's around the budgets and actual implementation.
So that's the point that I think is quite useful to understand-
Quite right
... in that respect. So, sorry to just, interrupt on that, but it is a
really, really important point because it is one of the biggest bugbears for
delivering public transport and other transport orientated, activities
around the planning and then the implementation of where funding comes
from.
Look, thank you. Uh, you... we have met time. We've actually gone over time.
Plenty of questions there, and I'm sure we could keep going.
Thank you.
Um, lots in the submission, and we do appreciate your submission and,
you're appearing again, Dion, for, I think, the third time perhaps.
But no, we really appreciate it.
Might be my last time, so good to see you all.
Thank you.
No, thank you. Thank you all.
Thank you, Chair. Thanks, committee.
Thank you. Ka kite.
Ka kite.
Thanks, sir.
So we now move on to our next submitter,
New Zealand Telecommunications
Forum.
Um, thank you.
And Kim, we can see you there. Welcome to the select
committee this afternoon. Look, you have 20 minutes with
us, so, do take your submission as read, but we will hand it
over to you to talk us through, any highlights you wanna point
out, and then we'll open for questions.
Uh, thank you, Chair, and good afternoon, everyone.
Um, I'm the policy director for the New Zealand Telecommunications
Forum, which is the industry body, for the telco sector.
I'll be talking about the bills, and the impact of them on our
sector at a fairly high level. And committee members will also be hearing
from some of our members tomorrow who can speak to their specific
experiences and concerns, and a number of them are planners as well, so they can
really get into the details with you.Uh, but before we get going, just a
little shout-out to everyone who's been working on these bills in such a tight
timeframe, and thank you to the officials who have managed to find
the time to talk with Critical Infrastructure.
We really appreciate it. In the time we have with
the, committee today, I'd like to discuss the following
things. First, tele- telecommunications as the
sometimes forgotten critical infrastructure and how the resource
management system can make it difficult to get connectivity to people
who want it. Second, I'll mention some aspects of the planning
bill that will help infrastructure get where it needs to go.
And thirdly, some areas where we're suggesting amendments.
There are five of these that I'll speak to today, and they concern
the importance of getting the first national, instruments
right, how infrastructure is dealt with in the
goals, a little something about infrastructure-related
definitions, permitted activities, and some issues
with designations. I'll then fin-finish up with a question
or perhaps more of a plea about the transition
process. So first up, I thought it'd be useful just to
set the scene by explaining a little bit about how telecommunications
engages with the resource management system.
As some of you may be aware, our members operate telecommunications
networks that enable New Zealanders to make phone calls, send
text messages, and access the internet.
Services, I think we all agree, are essential to everyday
life. But ensuring we can all get online wherever
and whenever we want to depends on telcos being able to
build and upgrade and maintain their infrastructure.
So for example, making a mobile phone call or getting online on the
go means we need cell sites. Simply put, you know, poles
with antennas on top. And when big buildings go up in a
locali- locality, we're gonna need taller poles, you know, or more
of them to get signals around those buildings and achieve the same
coverage. And the resource management system and the regional
variation it currently allows, you know, around consenting and
overlays can make it really difficult and expensive to build that
infrastructure. And the people who lose out are
communities. They've either got to wait a lot longer for their
upgrades, or in some cases, they're not gonna get, coverage at
all. And I'll just give you a few examples of this.
Um, the first concerns Mount Iron and Wanaka.
Um, there's an area of outstand-- there's an outstanding natural feature
overlay, for this area in the proposed district plan.
Um, one of our members has had a temporary cell site with pretty
inferior coverage in place since twenty fifteen, and
there's been several attempts to replace this with a permanent site.
Um, but these proposed sites don't get built because of the complexity and
uncertainty of consenting and landowner approvals.
Um, another example is more generic, and this concerns
getting connectivity into new housing developments.
Councils will have inconsistent requirements about telco
infrastructure, and sometimes they don't have any at all.
And this means that network operators can miss the opportunity to
install their fiber optic cables under the ground or get cell sites
along the road before houses and roads are built.
Um, and installing them after the fact is really disruptive, and it can be quite
cost prohibitive. And Chorus will, talk to the c- members of the
committee about this tomorrow. But the good news is the planning
bill aims to address red tape and delays,
through standardized rules and zones and fewer plans.
And this greater consistency nationally in
reducing, the need for consents will really help
operators of national networks, which is awesome.
But only if the system is implemented as intended.
And this is why it's so critical to get the national direction right from the
get-go. And as you know, the new system will
leave much of what matters to critical infrastructure, to the national policy
directions and national standards.
And these instruments are gonna be critical 'cause they're gonna direct the land
use and natural environment plans for the first ten
years. If done well, this will mean far
less regional variation without these bespoke standards,
and reducing the need potentially for infrastructure and then, you know, of a
nationally operated network to engage across a possible seventeen
combined plans, seventeen national environment plans, and possibly
sixty-seven land use plans. But getting this all-important
national direction right from the start does require
critical infrastructure and other stakeholders to have input at the
pre-notification stage, and that's not currently provided for in the
bill. And this is in part because the new national
direction will bring together several sets of highly technical,
industry-specific environmental standards.
So having infrastructure at the table at the beginning will just help get
that, that right from the start. Uh, we're also saying that
submitters would need more than twenty working days during that public
notification stage. Um, we're anticipating fairly technical
documents, so our suggestion is to allow at least forty days for
that, part of the consultation.
And you'll also see from our submission, we suggested that the overall time
frame for creating that first natural...
the, the first set of national direction instruments be extended.
These things always take longer, than expected.
For example, we've been working on the National Environmental Standards for
Telecommunications Facilities, NESTF for short, you know, for at least
eighteen months. That's not yet finished.
Um, and we wouldn't want to get through this process and sort of lose some of the
benefits, you know, of those updates because national direction pulling
things together is rushed. So moving now to
definitions, just a couple of quick points here.
Um, we're suggesting that there be definitions for
infrastructure in both bills. That currently isn't the case, in
the drafting. Um, we think it's pretty important to have these consistent
definitions 'cause it helps territorial authorities start with the
same understanding, and starting point, and there's more detail on
that in the written submission.Uh, turning now to the
goals, I think other critical infrastructure submitters
have already spoken to the committee about the importance of adequately addressing
infrastructure in the goals and, and we agree, with those
submissions. Um, what we're saying is that without
sufficiently directive language, there's a risk that infrastructure
related goals would be interpreted as being less important when we
don't think that's the policy intent.
And given the short period to prepare the national policy direction and those
other higher order instruments, we think there could be some
interpretation issues with the goals.
Uh, so in our submission, we've proposed amendments to the infrastructure related
goal in the planning bill, just to bring this more directive language in
there to protect infrastructure from reverse sensitivity.
Um, we just don't think we can leave this important issue to chance,
in national instruments where Parliament wouldn't have a
say. Uh, we also support the proposal that Transpower
and others have made over the past week or so, to include an
infrastructure related goal in the natural environment bill.
Uh, we think this would also help some of the problems folks see with
splitting the legislation in two.
Uh, permitted activities is the next topic I'd like to
raise. We are concerned that, Clause
38 of the planning bill could potentially allow councils to
acquire registration for all permitted activities,
and this would defeat the policy intent of least
consenting by establishing what almost looks like a
quasi-consenting process. And we think this is probably a
drafting error, and that the intention was to enable registrations
on an exceptions basis. And to put this issue in
context, telco network operators current- really rely
on national environmental standards to do routine activities such
as connecting customers, without the need for resource
consents. And if registration was required for these basic sorts of
things, regime would be less permissive than what we currently
have. Um, and we don't think that registration and monitoring in
these sort of routine situations would add any value, and
the cost and time required would, would divert resources,
from network maintenance and upgrades, and those sorts of important
things. Uh, so, in our submission, we've proposed a
carve-out for critical infrastructure, and if the committee didn't like the sound
of that, then we propose that the permitted activity
rules are only allowed when required or not precluded
by a national rule. Uh, next up,
I'd like to comment on designations.
Um, like some of the other infrastructure submitters, we are concerned about the
strategic need test. Um, this test would open
debate about strategic need, which sort of doesn't make sense for
linear infrastructure. That just kinda needs to go where the people are.
Um, and also seems to conflict with this exclusion of
project demand clause in 14.
And you also see in our submission that we're seeking clarity on the relationship
between designated and national rules, 'cause from our sort of reading
of the bill, it looked like those might cancel each other
out. And the last topic I'd like to raise
here is about the transition. Uh, Clause
52 of the planning bill anticipates that national
instruments may provide for transitional ma- matters.
Uh, we think it's essential that existing national environmental
standards, including those we've pos- recently been working on for
telecommunications, transition across, until
the new national standards are developed, and we're not sure if that's gonna be the
case, but some of these things are still being worked out.
But if they didn't, we just think there'd be quite a bit of chaos.
Um, so that brings me to the end of my list.
Very happy to answer any questions.
Look, thank you very much, Kim. Look, I might jump in because,
I'm very interested in how the permitted
activity, clauses
impact different sectors, and you've obviously raised it.
Um, can you just give... I mean, you've kind of given a few exa-- Well, you
haven't actually given any examples, but you've ca- you've, you've, you've said
that you're worried about it becoming a quasi-consenting process,
and then, obviously there's quite a lot of permitted
activities that are going on within the sector.
Could you give us some examples where you think that this would be an
impact at the moment the way it stands?
And, and, and I suppose what the issue specifically is on the ground.
Mm. So t- thank you, Chair. To give you a few,
examples, so I think I mentioned before customer connection.
So, you know when somebody wants to get fiber connected to
their house, a technician needs to come to the house,
and connect some things. Um, if
a,
if we had to, for example, I don't know, take a photo of that, you know,
at the moment it's permitted, you know, you can just do it.
But if we were required to do extra paperwork for that or take photos of those
sorts of things and send them in, those are extra administrative steps
that aren't currently provided for.
Um, other examples of permitted activities,
can be to, you know, replace some equipment, on a,
on a pole, that needs a new,
um... Something's broken. Again, going out and
taking photos of these sorts of things. Uh, that's quite often what councils do.
They might want a report, or an independent
person, for example, you know, to verify that the, the noise
coming out of an equipment, cabinet,
you know-Isn't too noisy. They say all these things are permitted at the
moment. What we're worried about is council requiring us to prove that
they're okay, when at the moment it's already understood that these are
permitted activities that don't require councils to request
extra information. Um, am I answering your question?
So, yeah, because it's kind of different in different industries, you know, like,
because obviously some, like, farmers, there's the freshwater farm plan that they
would, you know, obviously be adhering to, whereas do you...
What do you have in your kind of sector?
Is there another type of plan or something, or is it just the-
Yeah
... the council plan?
Yeah, so what we have is... Oh, sorry, I should start.
We have the national environmental standards for telecommunication
facilities.
Okay.
And in, they're a regulation, under the Resource Management
Act, and in that it lists a number of things that are allowed
to be done, without needing to get a
resource consent.
Mm.
And what we're worried about is all those things that, which are just everyday
installation things, we're worried that councils would then
require us to provide verification of
how we've done them, or to get third parties to say that they're okay.
Those are the sorts of things we're worried about.
Okay. No, that clarifies it. Um, look, Grant McCullum has a
question.
Yeah. G- couple. The, um... You mentioned the issue of reverse
sensitivity. Is that, is it a, is it a very
big deal? Is it... I mean, you know, the, the, the, the,
you've built the
cell tower or whatever, or the infrastructure somewhere.
What sort of things are you striking?
Is someone, are they complaining something's blocking their view and they
changed their house or something? What, what are you striking? I'm just curious.
Yeah. Like, amenity can be raised, as-
Mm
... as an issue. Sometimes, we need
to... I mean, one of the real difficulties, Grant, is
that tele- telecommunication, sometimes we don't have
choices about where-
Mm
... that infrastructure goes-
Yeah
... because it needs to get to, to the people.
So sometimes we can't avoid areas, which
have, you know, special values. You know, we
can't avoid there being some impact to
amenity. Um-
Mm
... and, you
know, sometimes they do have to go through sensitive environments.
Um-
Mm.
And if you've got a set of goals and one piece of legislation, which
is, you know, all about, you know, of course doing the right thing and, and looking
out for those sensitive areas, sometimes you are gonna
have to put infrastructure in those areas.
And so this, that's where we just wanna get that, that balance,
across. Um, because otherwise we could have problems
getting infrastructure where it needs to go to serve people.
Okay. No, thank you. That's, very helpful. Thank you. Mm.
Look, thank you very much, Kim, for, those insights,
and for your submission. Uh, we really appreciate your time
today, and, you know, for obviously highlighting
those areas, we feel there could be some
considerations made. So thank you.
And thank you very much for fitting us in. We appreciate it. Bye-bye.
Brilliant. Thank you.
So we now welcome through our next submitter, which is Woolworths
New Zealand.
Sorry, can you hear us?
Yes, we can hear you. We just can't-
Oh, right. See our screen
... see you. If you want to pop on your camera.
Yeah. Oh, there you go. We're just trying to get that technology
sorted.
It always helps.
Uh, we might just jump out and try and jump on again.
Sorry, we just can't get our camera operating.
Apologies for that.
Okay. No, that's all good.
Oh, there we go. We've got-
Sorry, Chair, we're just gonna try another, computer. Apologies for this.
It's, the technology's let us down unfortu- unfortunately, so-
And you were there waiting so early.
We were, and yeah, our
apologies.
So members, we'll just, wait a couple of minutes for our submitters
to,
work out the technology.
Still.
Mm.
Yeah.
There we go.
Oh, there we go. Mango.
No, s- apologies. Mate, what a terrible start.
Apologies for that. But, um-
Oh, no. That's okay. You're, you're not the only ones.
Um-
We've been sitting here for 20 minutes, like, like, getting everything lined up and
waiting for you.
And then the moment happens, and suddenly, you know-
Yeah.
... we appreciate it. Hey, welcome to the Select Committee this afternoon.
Great to have you with us. Um, look, you have 20 minutes, and do take
your submission as read, but we'll hand it over to you to, talk us
through it and any points that you want to make, and then, we'll open up the
questions. So over to you.
Yeah, thank you very much, and thanks for the opportunity to appear before you
today and, and, talk through our submission. So my name's James Radcliffe.
So I'm the general counsel at Woolworths New Zealand, and, with me today is
Matt Granger, who's our director of property.
And, as you mentioned, I think we'll cover some of the key points of our
submission today. Um, and then we'll open it up to any questions
that the, committee might have.
Just as a, a, I guess, a couple of opening comments, we're, very supportive of
the bills, and as outlined in our submission, we're a heavy user of the Resource
Management Act at the moment. And we think, like, as a nationwide large
business with one hundred and eighty stores, we think we can bring a useful
perspective to, your deliberations as we interact with almost
all local authorities around the country.
And therefore, we have a-- we think, a fairly direct and deep planning
experience. In our view, the most important objectives of
any planning regime should be to ensure that the planning law is,
predictable and consistent for all participants, including,
and as Matt will cover in a minute, sticking with concepts that are well understood
or where there's a strong body of case law under the current regime.
Uh, keeping the regime as efficient as possible in terms of complexity and
costs, and also that it balances, appropriate protections
for the natural environment. We've also been open in the past of-- with
our view that that planning law has a role to play in improving
supermarket competition in New Zealand by lowering barriers to entry for
new players to set up, and also for existing players to expand,
particularly in areas, where there's only one current option.
And with that, I guess I'll hand over to Matt, to talk through some of the
key points in our submissions.
Thanks, James. Um,
starting with, standardized, planning frameworks, which is
in paragraph seven of our submission.
Uh, we support the intent to provide regulatory
consistency across New Zealand, through standardized planning
documents. Uh,
our experience is that the current system, ignores the reality of
nationwide businesses, which need consistency to operate
efficiently. Uh, so to give you an example of this, every
district plan in New Zealand contains slightly different noise rules,
different dimensions for car parking and vehicle aisles and things like this,
which cause, unnecessary cost to applicants for something
that really could be standardized at a national level.
Um, so for these reasons, we support the national standards, to
manage, common activities and avoid unnecessary costs and
complexity. Um, and, we think, for example, that
nationally consistent standards and conditions could be specified,
for new retail grocery stores. Um,
turning to, the, engagement around national
instruments and spatial plans. Uh, we support,
the approach for
standardized, planning and use of national instruments.
Um, however, to ensure that these are of high quality, they
have to have, good input from key stakeholders.
Um, and so we would propose a, an increase to
the time limit for submissions to forty working days, given
the, complexity and, and span of some of these,
planning documents. Um, and we think that twenty working days in our
experience could be insufficient to, allow for quality
input. Um,
turning now to, the exclusion of retail distribution
effects. Um, we support excluding retail
distribution effects as a consideration under the planning
bill. Um, the effect of,
currently including these effects in the process under the
RMA is that it creates another hurdle for certain retail
activities. Uh, requires expert evidence to be
prepared, to assess whether a development's impacting existing
centers. Um, so applicants are forced to provide economic
analysis, and then often councils also,
require their own, analysis.
Um, and in most cases, the experts end up
reaching the same conclusion. So, for example, our,
application recently for a supermarket in Madra- Madras Street in
Christchurch, all up, we think around a hundred and fifty thousand
dollars was, the cost to us on experts and commissioners,
to deliberate on those effects, only for all the parties to
agree that there was no issue to be, found.
Uh, and also on that topic, case law has already set a very high
bar, that's very rarely met. So, the current
regime creates a costly exercise, with little
environmental value.
Um, turning now to trade competition.
Um, while we agree that trade competition effects should be out of
scope, we're concerned that the current drafting might
accidentally exclude legitimate concerns about effects on neighbors who
just happen to be trade competitors.
Um, it's been, this, trade
competition has been, regulated under the RMA for a number of
years and is well tested, and we believe that Clause Fourteen should
be amended to, return to the current,
well-understood wording under the Resource Management Act.
Um,
turning now to plan changes. Uh, we support the
ability to request private plan changes,
but, there are some new grounds proposed for local authorities to
reject a private plan change, which we oppose.
Um, we often find that, plan change a-applications are
required. For example, in greenfield growth areas where councils
often zone plenty of land for residential purposes but don't,
provide sufficiently zoned land for local shops and services for
those growing communities. So in th-in those instances, it's,
common for a plan change to be required.
However, there's a couple of provisions in the bill which we think are unnecessary,
relating to the ability to reject a plan change.
Uh, firstly, where it's inconsistent with land use plans, unless
a provision is out of date or there has been a significant change of
circumstances. And secondly, where a proposal is not
in accordance with sound planning practice.Um, and
we, we think that those, matters are
quite vague and will result in, a lot of debate about what
sound planning practice is, for example.
Um, and given that, plan change requests still need to be assessed on their
merits and at the cost to the applicant, the- doesn't
appear to be a strong justification for inserting these additional
hurdles.
Um, another aspect, in
terms of streamlining the consenting pathway, we support the
ability to grant a consent that also authorizes a plan
change, as this removes the need for a slow
two-uh, phase process. Uh, so to give you an example
of this, our Waiata Shores project in Auckland,
is a prime example where, we were wanting to
apply for a plan change and, to change the land from residential
to, neighborhood center. Uh, and also at the same
time to apply for a resource consent, and had contended that
both of those could be processed
together. Um, and
the,
the bill, would allow for that except for, Clause,
144 (2) which requires an applicant to prove a
significant benefit to housing or employment, which
seems a high bar for entry, for what is essentially
streamlining an existing cumbersome process.
Um, and furthermore, we could see that resulting in
unnecessary arguments about whether the benefits of a proposal are significant
or not. Um, so we seek the, the significant threshold
be removed to enable a more streamlined avenue for assessing
site-specific proposals which involve a plan change and a resource
consent in one process.
Hmm, so those, those were the key points we wanted to make.
Uh, and I think we're happy to take any questions that the committee might have.
Yes, we have lots of questions. So, we thank you for
your submission. Uh, lots of really valid points there.
So look, we'll start with Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks Chair. Uh, thanks gentlemen, for your submission.
I've probably found it one of the, the more straightforward ones to follow
actually. We've had quite a few, as you can imagine.
Um, but yeah, pr- pretty clear what you're trying to achieve.
Well actually, if, if I could just take a slightly wider remit,
obviously government recently introduced fast track with a carve out to
support supermarket growth. Given, I mean, if, if
you got... If, if I was saying crudely, if you got your way with this bill and had
some of those changes that obviously you're seeking, would that make the fast track
process redundant? I mean, obviously this would streamline a lot of things.
Or where do you, or would there still be need for it?
I'd just be interested in your views on the intersection of those
two.
Yeah, view on the matter. I know we did submit in relation to the fast track
proposals, and we did express the view that we felt there would be
benefits in having the incumbent, or the existing supermarkets
be, be entitled to the benefit of those simply to address the issue I
think we made in our submissions, which, you know, if there's a, a, a site where
there's only, or an area where there's only one supermarket, you know, it might be,
beneficial for competition to allow another.
But I, I'm not sure if we've turned our mind to whether this, these
submissions would make the fast track regime redundant or not.
Matt, do you have a-
Yeah. I, I mean, I think generally we would support,
changes which make the planning system more efficient
and, less cumbersome. Um, I think the
fast track regime was sort of primarily intended for a, a sort of
new entrant into the supermarket industry in New Zealand to sort of consent
multiple sites, for example. Um, so there's probably still a place for that,
but, I think the changes that are proposed here to streamline the
planning processes would be beneficial nonetheless.
Sure. And as a national provider, it's more about that
standardization across the country-
Yeah
... so you're not having all those different nuances. Yeah. Okay. All right.
Thank you.
Thank you. And Cameron Luxton has a question.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair. Yeah, so from, Mr.
Hamilton's wider question to a tighter one, you guys put in your
submission here, some amendments, to Clause 14, the
exclusions, matters for exclusions clause.
Uh, you've crossed out negative of, and a few other words.
So the previous one said, "Negative effects of development on trade
competitors, including on competition providers and of input goods and
services." And you've crossed out some words to make it effect on trade
competition. So I was just hoping to, considering your comments in
the,
submission, above that recommendation, I was hoping you could expand on
why you think that would be a change that we should
consider.
Yeah. Um,
so I, I think it's not in our submission, but I think it needs to be read in the
context of the sub-subclauses above and below that.
Um, I guess the point that we were making is
that, we're supportive of excluding consideration of
trade competition as an effect. Uh, but
there are instances where, you might have,
two parties who happen to be trade competitors, but there's
legitimate, environmental concerns or planning concerns which
they should be able to submit on. Um, so to give you an example of
that, we had a, a situation once where we had a, a existing
supermarket. There was a new supermarket proposed over the road.
As part of their application, they were proposing to, make
some changes to the, road markings and turning,
arrangements, which would have prevented access to our site.
Uh, which we, submitted to, and that was deemed a legitimate,
planning consideration. It wasn't relating to trade competition, it was about
access. Um, and, that was worked out through the planning
process and, you know, the, the road, design was changed
to mitigate, you know, to address that, that issue.
So what we're saying is we're happy with-Trade competition effects being
excluded, that's well established under the RMA, it's been around for quite a long
time now. Uh, but, the way that this particular clause is
written may have, sort of prevented legitimate effects from
being considered.
Okay. So you, so you're just worried that it's, the remit is too broad.
Okay. Um, I had another sub there if there's time, Chair.
Um, yes, yes.
Yeah. You've also... in the submission there's also,
some crossed out from Schedule 3,
Clause 52 in your submission, which
is around the, private
plan changes, having some things crossed out there. Could you explain some...
Could you explain to the committee the, the reasons for,
removing, the sound planning
practices phrasing in that part?
Yeah. I, I guess our view on that is that
it's very hard to define what sound planning practice is.
Um, so to reject a private plan change request
where it's not in accordance with sound planning practice, could
result in all sorts of arguments about what sound planning practice is or isn't-
Mm-hmm
... and, you know, cause further delay and,
and, so on. Uh, and in any
case, this is sort of a, a gateway if you like.
Um,
so our view is that that's not necessary.
Um, the application for the private plan change can still be assessed in the
normal way and, if it's got merits, it'll get
approved. If it doesn't, it will get declined.
And, and we, we just feel that this additional hurdle before that of assessing
whether it's sound planning practice or not is kind of
unnecessary.
Yeah. Thank you very much. Appreciate it.
Thank you. Look, I had a question, because you did speak
about the, the visual amenity and the internal and external
layout of buildings, and obviously,
supporting the exclusion of that given the experiences
that you've had in trying to build these supermarkets, and you've given,
Madras Street as an example. Um, you know, on
the, alternative to that we've heard from, like, the landscape
architects and the urban designers and things that, you know, believe that
there should be some kind of place based,
kind of, I suppose, wording within here, and they
supported, the visual amenity and wanted to kind of bring that back.
Um, is that something that you consider when you're
building your buildings within these, neighborhoods and
with- in these environments? Is, is that something that you would consider
anyway? Like, in terms of what it's gonna look like, is it gonna fit
in? Um, I know that you've got one that you're building right here in
Flaxmere at the moment. Um, looking forward to seeing that.
Um, very exciting. Um, like, what... Yeah.
C- talk us through the process and, you know-
Yeah
... how, how you feel about that and why you're so happy that that has been
excluded.
Yeah, I guess on, on that last point, our assessment is
that, you know, visual amenity is again a little bit like sound planning practice,
a very vague term, and can sort of open up all sorts of
debates, and take a lot of time and money to work
through, a, a planning application.
Um, so it's very subjective and can add a lot of time and
cost. Um, but to your o- original
question, obviously we totally respect the important part that we
play in local communities. Um, so we're very much
motivated to provide an attractive development, which will
appeal to local customers, and attract good tenants around it
because we want, you know, obviously a, a thriving business there and
good tenants surrounding the supermarket, and for customers to want to come to
it because it's a great place to come.
So, it's not in our interest to design sort of ugly
developments. Uh, we're very conscious of our role in communities
and trying to design something that's, gonna be attractive to the
community.
Okay. Thank you. And just another quick question because we have got time.
The, y- like, when you give examples, like give, give...
Could you give an actual practical example of where, you know-
In relation to visual amenity?
... something's just been held up for such a long time-
Yeah, yeah
... because of the visual amenity, that just c- caused-
Yeah
... a lot of hold up?
So, I mean, I can think of an example where we, had an
application. Uh, and often councils have a urban design
panel, so we had to go to the urban design panel and they assessed our
application and said, "Oh, we don't like this, and we don't like that." Uh, we then
amended the design to address those concerns, went back.
Turns out it was a different group of panelists who had different
views. Uh, and so the things that the first
panel asked us to do, they didn't like, and so we sort of had to do some further
changes to try and address the second panel, which kind of brings me to that point
about how it's very subjective and, you know, different people
assessing it might have different views as to whether something's good or
bad. And, I think in that ep- in that instance we went
through four different urban design panel processes, as part
of our resource consent, application.
Look, thank you very much. Um, look, we've, we'll wrap it up
there, but we really appreciate your submission, all of the insights
and, and all the points you've made and, and the work you've put into this.
So, you know, obviously a very important sector, where we obviously
want to see more supermarkets. So thank you very much.
All right. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thanks for your time.
So members, that brings us to the end of this particular session,
so, we're going to have a break now,
until 3:30, where we will resume at
3:30. So, thank
you.Right.
Welcome back everyone to the hearings this
afternoon. Uh, we will now welcome our
3:30 submitter, Tai Tuara, and
we can see you there. We've got, Matt
up and Eileen
upAnd Claire may be still
waiting for a prompt to come through.
We just can't see Claire yet. Well, there we
go. We can see you now. So I think, we have you all.
So welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, we appreciate your time. Uh, look, take your submission as
read, but we'll hand over to you to talk us through the main points,
and then open up the questions.
So thank you.
Kia ora koutou. Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name's Aileen Lawrie. I'm the chief executive of Thames-Coromandel District
Council and chair of the Tai Tokerau Resource Management
Reference Group. So here with me today is Matt Conway,
partner at Simpson Grierson, and Claire Wooding, the manager of
Sector Readiness at Tai Tokerau. So firstly, who are
we? Uh, we are local government professionals
Aotearoa. We're New Zealand's leading membership network for
professionals working in and for local government.
Our membership base is a thousand plus, and we comprise membership from
all seventy-eight local authorities.
Our primary role is to help local authorities perform their duties and
responsibilities as effectively and efficiently as possible.
We try to avoid, politics, and we try to not have opinions
on political matters, so our intention in making submissions
is around what's effective and efficient and what will
work. So firstly, I want to emphasize we do support the direction
and travel of much of the bills.
Um, today we are looking to focus on four
areas. One, implementation. Two, system
architecture. Three, recognition of te tiriti and Māori
interests. And fourthly, the regulatory relief
components. Uh, we note our submission is quite long, but
I would encourage the exec summary, as, as a useful
read, and we've got some really useful graphics at the back of the
submission. Uh, one of the graphics in particular, page
ninety-four, t- shows the complexity of the reform landscape that local
government is currently navigating, and I'm sure the committee's been hearing that
over the last few days. Um, so this RM
reform is taking place at the same time of a whole load of other reforms and
changes in local government. Uh, we're concerned that the RM
policy changes, and in fact some of the others, are being developed
without consideration across the, the boundaries into other
reforms. Uh, we came to see a coherent reform
program, with transitional provisions that recognize the overall
system capability and capacity. Um,
specifically some of the disruptive implications of structural change or
re- organization, are timed to be
occurring at the same time as we're attempting to implement the new
planning system, and with other reforms, running
alongside. And we do raise this matter knowing that the
committee may well believe it to be outside the scope of its
considerations. Um, but as we turn up to different
reforms to submit on them, if they're outside the scope of every-- each
reform, we have to ask who's actually considering how the, how the reforms hang
together. So at the end of the day, local government is charged
with, implementing the reforms, and we urge the committee to consider
the, time frames in particular against that backdrop of other
changes. Um, and Matt will speak to it a bit later around the importance
of, a coherent implementation.
Uh, so firstly, the implementation timeline.
Um, so just wanted to say we're huge supporters of regional spatial plans,
and we've been advocating for a long time to have mandatory spatial plans with
regulatory weight.
Um, we are concerned that the proposed sequencing though requires regional
spatial plans to be prepared before a number of key policy
directions, environmental limits, and standards are in place.
Um, to deliver robust and credible plans, those foundational instruments
need to be in place first. Uh, so we're concerned that the current
timeframe risks poor quality spatial plans, which will then
drive poor quality natural environment plans and land use plans that follow
them. Uh, in addition to the sequencing
issue, the, the timeline is ambitious, and on page
one oh two of our submission, you will see where we've attempted to,
piece it together for you. Uh, we think it will-- the process will
need time extensions or it will release, result in,
in rushed planning documents without, quality and
integration. So we strongly encourage, you
not to prior- prioritize speed over quality.
Um, the cost of not doing the RPS as well will be years and years,
and, that will follow. Uh, so the new
framework depends really heavily on good quality national direction and
standards being established first, and then for council to have su- sufficient time
to properly interpret and apply those spatial, natural
environment and land use planning.
So again, section, page one oh two of our submission
shows a detailed working, of the
time that it'll take to do a regional spatial plan.
So for a best case scenario, with everything going smoothly across every region in
the country, we need around twenty-three months from the point of
notification from the Royal Ascent compared to the fifteen months that the planning
bill provides.
So we're suggesting that the statutory framework is resequenced so that the
RP, regional spatial plans are prepared
after all that necessary national direction is released and environmental standards
confirmed. And also following the regional land transport plan, given its
importance in the major transport, planning.
Uh, bills, should provide clarity as to when each
tranche of natural-- national direction will be confirmed and what each tranche
will contain. Um, and time frames of the natural
environment plans and land use plans, should be shifted accordingly so they
can be properly informed by both na- national direction and regional
spatial plans. So I guess our key messages there is,
can we do it once properly and then let the benefits flow into the rest of the
system?And at this stage, I'd like to hand over to
Matt.
Thanks, Aileen, and kia ora koutou.
I just wanna first start by reinforcing Aileen's point about
implementation. Uh, there is a workload
component here, and also about a clarity.
It's in clarity and certainty. The workload piece is pretty
real from my perspective, because working across the country
for a lot of different councils and also other submitters into council processes,
we see a lot of this work going on under the RMA at the moment.
And if we have significant bulge of plans
and spatial, planning documents across the country going
through at the same time, it will put a real pressure
on the, the sector as a whole, including submitters.
But the clarity and certainty piece is also really important,
particularly for communities, business owners, and
investors. If, there is a
carefully sequenced implementation phase over a realistic timeframe,
that would lead to higher quality planning documents, less litigation, and a
more orderly transition. And so in turn, that builds
confidence in the system and the investment decisions that depend on
it. We're often asked, again with a different hat on from the Tai
Tuaraa hat, by our developer clients
to give them a sense of what the outcome of a process will
be and when will they know, and how, how well
the planning documents are prepared is a significant pon-
component in that, so that we can provide them with certainty in order
to make business decisions to invest in New Zealand and in
communities. So if the system's in a state of flux, or if
planning documents have been, rushed through, the
process or, or under other pressure, that makes it a lot
harder for people to make good quality business
decisions. Turning next to
the architecture of the new system, this is also really
important, in order to have the, the system
succeed. And again, success is something that's really important to Tai
Tuaraa and the way this all plays out.
And you've heard from submitters, I'm conscious of that, about some key
components and features that need to be in place for it to be workable and
stable. And a key thing that, that we think
needs, more focus is strong direction at the
top of the system. A top-down system works well if
what's at the top is clear and will flow down really well into the rest of
the system. So something that we agree
entirely with New Zealand Planning Institute about is that it would be
helpful to have clear overarching
direction within the bills themselves, to
help resolve tensions between the two bills and also between the goals
within each bill. So, as you'll no
doubt be aware, unlike the RMA, there's no single overarching purpose
within the bills and across both of them.
Instead, each of the bills has a descriptive purpose, so it says what the
leg- legislation does rather than set out
the outcomes the system's trying to achieve.
And so the purpose statements focusing on those don't appear to play any
operative role in decision-making.
As a result, the bills create the shell of a system rather than its
substance, which places heavy reliance
on two things. First is the goals.
Uh, the goals, but as I'll
talk about shortly, some important matters are missing from the goals,
which reduces clarity. And the second thing it places heavy
reliance on is national direction. And again, that's really important.
We support having that, but it is more susceptible to change over time, which
reduces stability. So touching first on the
goals, there are some gaps that the Tai Tuaraa submission
notes relating to Māori relationships and values,
environmental protection, and long-term sustainability matters.
Um, often some of those are, th- are things that were in
RMA Section six and seven but haven't been carried
across. Uh, there's also no explicit goal relating
to climate change, which there was in the RMA.
And so an aspect here that we'd like some focus on is,
that if local government is expected to undertake adaptation
planning, and given that spatial planning is inherently linked to climate
risk, that needs to be clearly anchored in the planning bill
to make sure it fits together in the system.
Uh, the other thing that doesn't seem to be there is a goal promoting renewable
energy. Uh, and that, that's in the RMA at present,
and it's also a really key focus, helpfully so, of
current national direction under the RMA, including the national direction
that came in, into force a couple of months ago.
Uh, so we think it would be really helpful to have a goal promoting renewable
energy just to make sure it's clear that that will flow through to the rest of
the system too, and be able to continue the good work that's been done recently in
that area. And then finally, there is a natural
hazard goal actually in each of the pieces of legislation, but it differs
between the two of them. And so the way that
interacts and the way implementation occurs, I think will be
made more challenging by the differing goals there.
And so it would be helpful to align those goals and also make sure it's really
clear the way they interact across those two pieces of
legislation. So that's the goals.
Now, the second piece I mentioned about, reliance of the
system is on national direction. As I said, we're
really supportive of national direction. It's a key element.
But the issue here, I think, is that the substance of the
system essentially appears to be deferred to
be within that national direction rather than being in the
legislation. So that's the substance, as in what it's trying to
achieve. And so an element here that I think is of concern
is the overall stability of the
system.Um, so
planning and environmental decisions, as we've seen under the RMA, inherently
involve balancing competing factors. There's many of those.
You can try to be as rigid as you can, but you'll still need to test
differing approaches and, and aspects in any
decision. And so national direction is really helpful to guide that
balancing exercise. The challenge is, though, if
you're constantly adjusting that balance, it does slow the system
down and then tie up resources that could otherwise go into more
productive pursuits. Uh, and we've seen this under the freshwater
policy statement, and that came in in twenty eleven
initially, and then every three years there's been a reasonably
substantive amendment to it. And so each time,
because planning processes have been in train, councils
have often had to change, tack partway through, maybe
gather more data to base their implementation on, and then they
don't necessarily get a clear runway.
And so the, the constant regulatory churn that occurs is,
I think, a risk of this new system if there's no,
clear set, direction of travel in the, in the
legislation itself. And so,
again, for system participants who are trying to look through
those, through parliamentary cycles, for example,
and try to understand, you know, where their certainty for long-term investment
decisions sit, it's really helpful if there is strong and
cohesive substantive direction in the bills themselves.
Um, naturally that can still be changed, but if it's set at the outset, I
think it will create further clarity and help with that
certainty and therefore the success of the system and, and New, New
Zealand's attractiveness to investment.
Uh, the next topic I wanna touch on is recognition of Te Tiriti and Māori
interests. And the Tai Tuara submission addresses Te
Tiriti and Māori interests in quite some depth and across a few areas.
But today, I'm keen to just focus on one particular piece, which
is the implications of the bill's approach to existing treaty
settlements. So under both bills,
until the Crown PSGE renegotiation is
completed, councils must seek to give treaty settlement
redress the same or an equivalent effect as under
the RMA to the greatest extent possible.
And in practice, this requires councils to revisit
arrangements designed specifically for RMA processes like joint
management agreements and bespoke notification provisions for iwi
and hapū. And there's no clarity on how equivalent
effect is to be measured.
Because settlements were negotiated in the
context of the RMA, interpreting equivalence
under a new regime is legally and conceptually difficult, and
resolving these issues is likely to require litigation and court
involvement, and this will reduce certainty and
damage relationships. And so the request from Tai Tuara
is that these matters are addressed and resolved before councils
need to start implementing the new system rather than by them as they
try to implement it alongside all of the other points we've, we've
discussed.
The, the final topic I wanna touch on is regulatory relief.
I'm conscious you've heard a lot about that, and no doubt it's,
s- a source of quite a bit of consideration.
Um, you will have seen from the submission that Tai Tuara has significant
concerns about that regulatory relief
regime. And at a high level, as other
submitters have said, it creates a fundamental conflict for local
authorities who are required to implement
statutory obligations under both bills to protect key
resources like,
biodiversity, sites of significance to Māori and outstanding lan-
landscapes, while at the same time being exposed to claims
for compensation for doing so. And so this
effectively creates a large unfunded financial burden on local
government, which is particularly concerning in the context of proposed rates
capping.
And again, I'm conscious you've heard that from others.
It's also based on some uncertain and untested
concepts. Uh, so for example, the phrase significant
impact on reasonable use of land is different from the
long-established RMA tests of being incapable of reasonable use.
And so again, there's, there seems to be a wider entitlement to
relief that that creates
and a high risk of litigation.
Compounding this, councils are required to implement the regime
proactively, so they, they have to go out and identify affected land and
assess impacts property by property.
And given the scale and uncertainty of the regime, it's likely to be
time-intensive, costly, and highly
contested. And so that, it sits as a core
thing and a theme in the submission and what we've talked about even today
is, that I think from a practitioner's
perspective, it is really helpful to look at the way this
reform can make planning processes more efficient
so that people can get on with the doing rather than be tied up in the
processes constantly and have endless avenues for
challenge. Uh, and in my view, the
regulatory relief regime will do the opposite of that.
It will create more avenues and incentive for argument and
litigation. Um, even within the regime itself, it
contains several points at which challenges can occur
apparently concurrently. So there's environment court
challenges, there's objections to the council, there's,
there's challenges to those objection decisions, and it seems that
you could be caught up quite considerably in, in
litigation based on that. And there's a clear incentive to do
so, given that there's money on the line.So
if it is retained, if this regime is retained, which is
not, Taitua's primary preference, but we do see
merit in the NZPI proposed approach.
So that is where a council is fulfilling a statutory obligation and
applying the methodology that national direction
prescribes, regulatory relief should not apply.
So it should only be if councils depart from that, that it applies.
That would seem to narrow it down considerably and provide clarity for
everyone.
Finally, the transitional provisions, seem
to significantly expand the regime by allowing relief to be claimed
in relation to existing RMA plan provisions that are carried over where
the same persons own the land since that point.
Um, and that retrospective approach risks reopening settled
planning decisions and substantially increasing council liability.
So if the regime is retained, we say it
should apply prospectively only.
I'll now, just to illustrate some of those points a little more, hand back to
Ayling to-
Look, look, Matt
... speak to
Um, you actually have met time. Um, you've, had the full
20 minutes. Um, but look, we have got a couple of questions.
So, I think it would be great to be able to go to Rachel
just to ask, the question, before we have to wrap
up.
Sure. Understood. Thank you.
No, sorry. I was just gonna say it, it's a really helpful submission.
Thanks, thanks for that, and apologies for, my interruption earlier.
So probably Lan might have a proper question.
Okay. Lan, over to you.
Well, I've got lots of questions, Chair, but I appreciate we've just got time for
one. Um, thank you for your submission.
Very detailed. Um,
my question was ar- around, you know, you talk
about the disjoint between
the separate statutory
subsets, and you invite the committee to
consider whether there would be worth in actually
putting those together. And you use the term,
"Amend both bills to ensure that all significant environmental effects
of an activity can be assessed, even where those effects fall
outside the narrowly defined environment of a single
bill." And I hadn't actually... I'm not sure if the rest of the committee had, but
I hadn't actually picked up that
does each bill define the
bounds of where
its, I guess, reach actually
applies, and, and is that... Are there gaps
there? Wh- where, where are those definitions?
Thank you for the question. It, it relates to the areas of focus being on
the, the built environment versus the, the natural
environment, and in practice it's very difficult to separate those
things. Um, the environment doesn't tend to lend itself well to the
drawing of lines, between those sorts of things.
And it, it is quite an integrated thing, and the RMA seeks to grapple
with that. These bills endeavor to separate it out in a way that I think will
create some challenge.
Oh, thank you. So you're just talking about the broad terms rather
than specific definitions.
It does flow through into-
Okay
... the way the provisions set out the areas of specific focus
under the two different bills. Um, might have to pull out the specific
provisions, but if you f- follow through in the, that part of the
submission, it sets out some of those key ones.
Okay. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much. We are going to have to end it there
because, we have gone over time and have other submitters waiting.
But look, we really appreciate, all the work that's gone into this
submission. It's certainly a weighty submission.
I had many questions as well. But, yeah, you do explain a
lot in here, so we do appreciate the time you put into that.
So, thank you.
Thank you.
So we now welcome through our next submitter,
Watercare,
who are waiting.
And we can see Watercare. Welcome.
Thank you.
We can see you all there-
Welcome
... and hear you. Look, welcome to the Select Committee.
Uh, we have 20 minutes with you, so we'll hand it over to you to
talk us through your submission, and then we'll open up for questions.
Thank you.
Wonderful. Thank you very much. Uh, well, kia ora koutou.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity to be here today.
Uh, I'm Jamie Sinclair, chief executive of Watercare, and with me today is Priya
Umaprasad, our chief strategy and planning officer.
I'd like to thank the committee for the opportunity to speak to our submission.
Uh, we won't step through our written submission in detail, but we'll focus on key
points based on Watercare's experience delivering water infrastructure
at scale. We hope that these points will assist the committee in
considering how the legislation can better support essential three waters
infrastructure delivery across New Zealand.
A bit of context, Watercare is New Zealand's largest water infrastructure
business, with an asset base comparable in scale to organizations such
as Fonterra.
Our assets are valued at over $18 billion, and we invest over $1
billion every year in capital works to support population
growth in Auckland, protect public health, and improve environmental
outcomes. We operate the infrastructure of national
significance. For example, our Māngere Wastewater Treatment
Plant, which is one of the largest of its kind in the
world, services one-fifth of New Zealand's population.
We're also becoming economically regulated by the Commerce Commission and now are
financially separate from Auckland Council.
This requires us to raise our own debt in our own name to fund
our capital investment program. This program is heavily
dependent on resource management
regulation.We're delivering currently
over 120 infrastructure projects a- across Auckland,
and are planning more than 1,000 projects over the next decade
across the entirety of the Auckland region.
Uh, spending in that, in the region of $14 billion over that
10-year period. To support that, we've raised in the last year $3.4
billion in bank debt facilities, which is, we understand, one of the
largest, corporate bank debt capital raises in New
Zealand's history, and we're now currently active in the debt capital
markets. When infrastructure providers raise
capital, investors expect clarity and certainty around delivery,
regulation, and performance, including the resource management
process. Our experience, comes from Auckland,
but these issues will apply to water infrastructure providers across New
Zealand, and will be increasingly relevant for the new water services
organizations being established across the country.
I'll pass now to Rian to summarize our key submission points.
Thanks, Jamie. Oh, I don't know if the camera's gonna, gonna get to me, but I'll,
I'll crack on. So our experience, of the current
resource management framework is that it has been costly, time-consuming, and
often inconsistent when applied to essential public
infrastructure such as water infrastructure.
Even where activities have not materially changed, such as water
storage and long-established dams, the process of renewing
consents for critical assets like treatment plants, dams, and
pipelines can take many years and cost many millions of dollars.
From a resource management perspective, Watercare is one of the largest users
of the Resource Management Act in New Zealand.
We currently hold more than 2,000 resource consents, with over
400 requiring ongoing operational compliance.
The scale, complexity, and duration of consenting and re-consenting
essential infrastructure is therefore significant.
By way of example, we have budgeted approximately $25
million over seven years to re-consent our Māngere
Wastewater Treatment Plant, and $15 million to re-consent our
Rosedale Wastewater Treatment Plant.
In addition, consenting a new regionally significant water treatment plant
like Huia, took us seven years and involved $7.7
million in consenting costs, $8.25 million,
in offsets, $8.6 million in affected property
purchases, despite the site being designated for water supply
purposes. These lengthy processes and high
costs create uncertainty, delay in delivery of crit- critical
infrastructure, and ultimately fall on customer and our
communities. For these reasons, Watercare strongly supports the direction
of the resource management reforms and the opportunity to present...
Uh, sorry, they present to reduce, unnecessary
complexity, time, and cost, while continuing to
protect communities and the environment.
So we'd like to... We would particularly like the committee to focus on the
following points. Uh, recognition of long-lived infrastructure.
So water and wastewater infrastructure is essential for public health,
infrastructure designed to operate for 50 to 100 years
and relied upon by communities every day.
When long-lived assets are required to be repeatedly re-consented
despite no material change in activity, it drives cost,
time, and uncertainty. These costs ultimately fall on
communities through higher changes, higher charges, sorry, and
delayed investments. Recognizing infras- water infrastructure as
long-lived infrastructure
within the new resource management system would reduce unnecessary
re-consenting and allow for more funding to be directed
towards environmental improvement, resilience of our systems,
service reliability, rather than regulatory process,
lawyers and consultants.
Early and mandated involvement in water organiza- of water organizations
and planning processes, such as standing, standard setting and
regional spatial planning, is equally important to managing cost
and delivery risk, particularly with respect to growth.
Watercare's detailed operational knowledge
of network capacity, the constraints we have, infrastructure
sequencing. Uh, embedding water organo- organizations and
national direction in spatial planning would improve alignment, reduce
inefficiency, and support more affordable and timely delivery of infrastructure
in the right place at the right time to support planned growth
without compro- compromising environmental protections and public health
and safety.
Rian. And just to summarize, Watercare is delivering
an inf- infrastructure program comparable in scale and complexity to that of a
large government department, yet we operate within a planning system that was not
designed to support water infrastructure delivery at this scale.
As a re- result, the system can constrain timely and efficient
delivery of assets that communities rely on every day.
Getting the resource management reforms right is critical, not only for Watercare,
but also for the new water services organizations that are being stood up across
the country as part of the reform process.
A frame- framework that properly recognizes essential long-lived
infrastructure such as ours and enables earlier and better
alignment between planning and infrastructure delivery will reduce costs,
delays, and improve consistency and certainty, support
s- smarter, faster investment. And importantly, this can all be
achieved while continuing to protect communities, public health,
and the environment, while meeting the expectation New Zealanders have for
safe, reliable, life-supporting water services.
Thank you, and we'll be happy now to take any questions.
Look, thank you for your submission.
Uh, really interesting, and some really interesting
considerations in there
given all the work you do and the infrastructure you have in place.
But look, we'll go to Cameron Luxton for the first question.
Had his hand up first.
Oh.
Thank you, Chair. Um,
does Water... So, does Watercare, think that,
c-Infrastructure should remain a qualifying
matter, when the, when the,
uh... well, well, we've got the IFF Act, and so,
private sector can actually fund and finance to build bulk
infrastructure. Should it continue to be a qualifying
matter?
Um, yeah. Uh, I, I guess from a, a funding and financing
perspective, I think, absolutely.
I think we are going to need alternative sources of funding to not only,
motivate our pro- programme now, but into the future.
I would, sort of reflect on some of the commentary from Water New Zealand
around a national policy statement, for water
infrastructure as opposed to being caught up in, in a, a national policy
statement for infrastructure at large.
I think, given the longevity of the s- assets, the
service they provide absolutely warrants-
Mm
... that sort of, thought and elevation in the hierarchies.
So it should remain-
Did I answer your question?
No, yeah. So should, I mean, should remain a qualifying matter for, resource
consent for development, say?
Ab- absolutely.
Yep.
Thank you. Look, we'll go to Julianne Genter.
Tena koutou. Uh, thank you very much for your submission.
Um, I guess I just was interested in
the amendment that key infrastructure should be excluded from planning
consent, natural environment levies, and coastal occupation
charges. Um, and I just wanted to
ask, like, do... like, what methods do you
think we should use to make sure there is the incentive to get
the absolute best environmental and public
health outcomes from our critical infrastructure?
Because
there are examples in, in the past of
infrastructure providers
believing a certain outcome is the best, a certain project.
Mm.
And maybe they haven't-
Mm
... had the reason to consider, or the right-
... incentives to consider the long-term impacts, the co-benefits, you
know-
Mm
... because they're only responsible for one part of it.
And I accept what you're saying, that maybe,
the planning could be simplified because we need the critical infrastructure.
But I guess I'm interested in, like, w- what's the best way for us to make sure
that we're empowering and enabling communities-
Mm
... to get, the, the best outcomes, 'cause I think there's definitely, we
could be getting better outcomes, right, for the environment and, and water.
Yeah. Yeah. I, I, I'll pick up this one briefly. Thank you for the question.
Um, I think the, the role of regulation, economic
regulation in our context is, is probably quite important here because what,
what that will drive is us having much c- more
clarity on outcomes directly related to community
need. So tying community outcomes to investment
programmes and then to funding, to make sure that we are delivering
what our communities and customers need, when they need it, and
for an appropriate, price. So,
factoring that, those out- that outcomes based m-
approach, should improve, should improve, what
we're able to achieve and deliver over, over the longer term.
Um, yeah, that's probably a fair point.
Yeah.
And, and, and maybe just to add to that, I think the, the, the national
instruments, the standard setting is also critical to, to this and
making sure that, you know, we've, we've suggested that absolutely water
infrastructure and water services providers should be at the table, but I think
that standard setting itself is a, a key component of
ensuring that, we are focused on outcomes, as, as
we, as we move forward. I think in the past, you're right.
Um, there may be some instances where, where the outcome
or the long-term impacts haven't been well considered.
I think, the standard setting and the consultation, the engagement, the
connectivity of those standards to communities is really important in making sure
that that happens.
Yeah.
Chair, mine was just a supplementary on that.
Yes. Yep. Go for it.
Thank you. Um, it was really on the national
instruments and, you know, you're noting that,
you think the 20 working days
provided for public notification of those national instruments
is potentially too short, and that there's
no requirement necessarily to have appropriate
stakeholders at the table. Um, one solution
that has been suggested by other submitters
is potentially taking that national direction that
ministers sort of hold the pen with, and
potentially having more, like, board of inquiries that might be more likely
to take the time to get the right people and
expertise, round the table. Do you have any thoughts on
that as a potential alternative to the ministerial decision
making?
Um, I guess if I can jump in quickly.
Uh, I, I think anything that allows us to, to make sure, and I
guess connect to the fact that we need to be engaging with our communities anyway
as part of our service delivery, that allows that to happen more effectively, I
think we would support.
Mm.
Um, anything that means that, you know, we can, I guess as long as it's,
it's sort of framed up in a way that we get to answers-
Yeah
... and we get to, to, whatever limits or whatever
conditions are set in a, in as expedient a way as possible
that still allows us to move efficiently and effectively.
I think, yeah, we'd be absolutely open to those sorts of approaches,
but making sure that there, really there is time bound.
It's not these things that can take, you know, long, long periods of time
with consistent litigation, I think is, is something that would sort of
counteract what, what I guess the intention or intent is of these
reforms.
Mm. And Grant McCallum.
Yeah, good day. You've, you've, obviously, you've, you've, you've talked about
it a wee bit. There's the whole long lived infrastructure
piece-And the, your, your, your submission puts
quite a bit of effort into this, quite rightly.
I'm just trying to understand, like, when you had to re-consent the,
Hu- Huia, water treatment plant
replacement. So, ob- obviously, I mean,
y- y- you put down here the cost at $27.7 million.
Um, and, and obviously that has to be spread over your, you know, to the, the,
the rate payers or water users pay for it.
What sort of things are people objecting to?
Or h- how can we deal with stuff in that space without having
to go through a consent sp- thing if there are issues need to be modernized or
identified that, you know, locals have picked up, or people affected?
Any comment in that space?
Yeah. Um, I'll, I'll, I'll touch on it, and Pream will have more detail, but I, I,
I think, certainly we have to be attuned to, community
concern and interest. Um, I th- I think, and, and I think it's the way in which
those concerns are raised and then addressed, and how we
can sort of, you know, come, come to a sort of a
position where we, where we can actually move forward.
I think that's, that's been our challenge.
They've been re-litigating, I suppose, the same kind of issues time and
again.
Yeah.
I think one, one of the things I'd just add is that we're...
The Huia, Huia treatment plant's a good example of a regionally
significant, facility and asset, but the, the
actual sort of development and construction has a localized impact.
Yeah.
And I think, you know, one of the things we've, we've realized, and I think, you
know, we've really shone as a great example through the delivery of our central
interceptor projects, so the large wastewater pipeline that traverses Auckland.
Yep.
Where once the projects are up and running, we work with communities really quite
collaboratively-
Mm
... to try and deliver some outcomes where there is localized effect.
Mm.
But through this process, it's really difficult to do that,
'cause you don't have certainty of, of that project moving forward-
Mm
... until you get that consent. So it's very much chicken and egg.
Yeah.
So I think, it's, it's, it's on us to, to own
that engagement-
Yeah
... that connectivity with communities post-consent-
... which we do. I think that is a tricky thing to navigate in a broader
sort of, whole New Zealand setting, but that's absolutely something we do.
Yeah. Sure.
Is that something you'll be building?
'Cause obviously, you know, you don't wanna be doing that every 35 years.
You know, identify or say, "Why don't, why aren't you guys, your
consents for long-lived infrastructure like gas pipelines and telecom and so
forth?" Um, so how... 'Cause ob- you know, obviously things change,
technology changes. You know, things improve so you can
get less impact locally or whatever.
How can we ensure we get that and keep that relationship as
ultimately, without doing the whole expensive conf- com-
which, combative approach, which is what you tend to get with
consenting. That's, that's ultimately what I think it
is. Mm.
You're, you're right, and I th- and I think part, part of our challenge,
particularly in the water sector, is, and, and maybe why sometimes it's overlooked
as long-lived infrastructure, is a lot of it's underground.
Yeah.
Um, and, and so, you know, our existing Huia treatment plant, you know,
it was the only thing there for a long, long time, and then-
Mm
... the community built up around it.
Yeah.
But we've always sort of sat in the background.
And I think, you know, going forward with the new facilities that we are building,
we are working pretty hard to make sure they're connected to the place that they're
in.
Yeah.
That, you know, that, that more opportunity for folks to engage with it,
for schools to come and see it, for-
Yeah
... for it to be part of that community, so.
Yeah.
You know, in the past we sort of sat in the background and...
And it was probably just a, a, yeah, it was just, just the, just a, a, a,
initiatives and where we sat in the past.
But now, absolutely, you know, when we're thinking about the new Huia, it's how do
we actually sit in this community? How do we provide benefit?
Yeah.
How do we engage with the people who live around us?
Sure. Yeah.
And, and just, just, just to add on that, the, you know, we are making sort of
legacy decisions for Auckland and, and, it's all about
100 years plus.
Yeah.
Um, so central intercepts, a great example Pream touched on, that's, that is
100-year life and it's, it's, it's a, it's a, it's a
wonderful asset that will improve outcomes for Auckland, but it's, it's
absolutely, set in stone for the next 100 years
distributing, conveying wastewater to Māngere Wastewater Treatment
Plant. So we've, we've sort of cast the die in many respects.
Um, so we have to take community on the journey, and I think we did that well in
that case. But, those decisions are multi,
multi-generational.
Yeah. Thank you.
Absolutely. Look, I think that's a good place to wrap it up.
Uh, thank you very much for your submission today, and the work you're
doing. Of course, water infrastructure, incredibly important.
Obviously, coming from Hawksbay, I, I know very well.
So, yeah, I really, we really appreciate your
submission, and all the points you've made, and, and, and, you know, really
pointing out the importance of this, water infrastructure.
So, thank you.
Yeah, but thank you.
Thanks all.
So we now move on to our next
submitter, Port of Tauranga.
So we
can see Dan there. You just need to accept the
prompt.
There we go. We can see you both. Welcome to the select
committee this afternoon. You've got 20 minutes with us.
Uh, take your submission as read, and we'll hand it over to you to talk us through
the main points and then open up for questions. So over to you.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much. Uh, good afternoon.
Uh, by way of introduction, Dan Kneebone's my name.
I'm the GM Property and Infrastructure at Port of Tauranga, and alongside
me is, Corey Lapinski, who's been providing, legal
support, from, HOBEC-So look,
thank you very much. I, I, I just really wanted to...
I, I guess thanks for the opportunity to present on the Natural Environment and
Planning Bills. Um, I was gonna take our
submission as read, and wasn't gonna go through it in, in, in too much detail, but
just to talk to where we're at at a high level.
I guess our main concern is the inefficiency and the
unreliability of the, of the current system.
And at the risk of stating the obvious, Port of Tauranga is New
Zealand's largest port. We provide essential infrastructure to New
Zealand exporters and importers,
and we're currently pursuing developments to increase Port of
Tauranga's capacity and improve the resilience of the
upper North Island supply chain. A- and, and the...
We've made no secret of the fact that we've, felt extremely constrained under
the current system. And
I, I, I think to summarize, the current RMA framework
is preventing practical and efficient outcomes, and we've been very
clear that we're not wanting to take environmental shortcuts.
And through all the monitoring, research, and independent reports that have
been undertaken, we've been able to demonstrate that port growth
can occur concurrently with environmental
improvements, and that's probably the, the big thing we wanna w- we, we,
we, we wanna emphasize. And look, we've, we've...
There's, there's been no secret with, the way it's been played out in the
media. We've got some significant development plans,
plans that have been in place, 30 years ago since the
inception of the RMA. Uh, the concept plans sit
within the Regional Coastal Environmental Plan. It's nothing new.
It's within the footprint of the
existing, of the existing, port
development, and I often use the descriptor we're, we're effectively
completing the development of what was planned more than three decades ago.
So, and, and, and I guess we're getting pressure, from
central government, from
New Zealand shippers, Fonterra, Zespri,
other key exporters to, to have a
sufficient capacity and a reliable and resilient,
infrastructure system through, through, through, through, through the Port of
Tauranga. And, and, and that's what we're simply trying to achieve, and I guess
that, that is the, that's sort of talked to in detail in our submission,
and
that's the main thing we're trying to achieve here.
So look, I'm, I'm happy to take our,
submission as read and, and answer any specific questions on
it or provide any more clarity that's
required.
Look, thank you very much, and we can see your port there behind
you on the wall. So, yeah, familiar with
obviously the challenges you're going through there with your consents of the
Sailor Passage. But look, I'll hand over to Cameron
Luxton for the first question, being from Tauranga
himself.
No, thank you, Chair. And, thank you, Dan, for submitting on yet
another environment bill. Um, going, making your, making
the views of Port of Tauranga heard.
It is a, as you say, a critical piece of infrastructure for the central upper North
Island. So I guess, my question, because of the
amount of times you've had to, submit, on these sort of bills, like,
what, what is a major change that we could actually make to
the resource management system that would he- assist Port of Tauranga?
I think, I think I'll answer that question, with two key points.
Firstly, acknowledgement of port infrastructure legislation
giving activities, permitted status or, or preferential
treatment. That would be the first part of the answer.
And the second part of the answer would be,
rolling over, of existing consents,
for a long duration. And I guess examples of
that, and we've referred to it in our submission, would be our,
maintenance dredging consents.
For example, the port occupation
consents have been rolled over for 20 years, and as part
of that, we would like to see maintenance dredging consents
rolled over at the same time to... 'Cause to put that in context, as the occupation
consent has limited value if we can't
maintain the depths of our current channels to bring the vessels in and out.
So, yeah, that would be the second part of that answer.
Okay. And s- and so I mean, and like that is actually part of what you've got in
your sub... well, the two things you've mentioned, one of them is particularly part
of the submission that you've supplied the committee about acknowledging the
importance of port infrastructure and affording it the similar benefit as renewable
energy infrastructure. What-
Correct
... sort of differences are there between something, you know, so critical
as, energy and so critical as our connection to the rest of the world as
a trading nation?
Yeah. I, I'd agree. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. So there wouldn't be many differences.
They're both regionally and/or nationally significant infrastructure.
Um, it's both important, and without them having access to the rest of the
world via ports for trading-
S- sorry, to be... I, I understand the importance.
Obv- I meant, sorry, in the planning system and in the, in the resource consenting
system, like, what currently are the differences?
Do you just want it to be acknowledged in this bill alongside
renewable? What is the legal status is what I'm talking about or
asking about.
Oh, yes. Yes. Of course. So, renewable energy is given a
cer- a higher status in these bills and in the current system due to
some recent reforms that have gone through.
So they're being essentially put up on a higher tier, and they have certain
acknowledgments such as, default one-year processing times,
which we would also like to see the port elevated to that same status due
to, them being both regionally and/or nationally significant pieces of
infrastructure.
Okay. Thank you.
We'll now move to Grant McCallum for a question.
Yeah. Hi. Um, it's really just following on from,
so from, Cam's questions. So j- just in
terms of, like, you mentioned you just had a, a 20-year-
Uh, use, consent rolled over. And
obviously the dredging needs to line up, otherwise it's pointless, as you
highlighted. But what, but that even i- of itself
is very short-term given the
fact you're, the port's not going anywhere and the country needs
it. Um, there has to be a...
y- yes, things probably need to be, I suppose, checked and upgra- updated, but
is there a better way to ensure that you can get on and do your business
without that, that uncertainty?
A- a- absolutely. And I think, so, so, so, so the, what we referred to was
the port occupation consents that w- were due to expire and have been rolled over
for 20 years. We actually, asked that they be rolled over for a, for
a minimum of 35 years. Um, that, that would be the, the preference, but
you're, you're absolutely right.
So I guess as a, as a minimum, we'd like to see those consents rolled
over for 35-year periods or effectively,
be, be, be, be permitted activities. Yeah.
Yeah. It just seems crazy. I mean, obviously you've gotta make sure that
you're, you know, you g- you need a, like, a sense check, a health
check to make sure everything's operating well and there's no new impacts on the
environment or the, like, surrounding area, but the port ain't going anywhere and
we've... it's gotta stay, and we're gonna have to keep using it. Yeah.
I completely agree, and that was the point I emphasized earlier is that, you know,
this is not about us trying to take environmental shortcuts.
We, we wanna make sure we're doing the right thing, and, and, and, and
doing our bit for, for harbour health, air quality, those sorts of things.
But without, just having some, having some certainty to provide key
infrastructure.
Yeah. Yeah. Thank you.
Look, I might just jump in there and ask a question.
Um, because, you know, obviously there's a huge cost at the
moment for you to the whole consenting process and the regime
that you're under. I suppose not just from, the ships not being
able to come in because you can't build the infrastructure, but the opportunity
cost, I suppose, that's potentially been lost, through our
exports, you know, with, obviously being a large kiwifruit,
hub there. Um, could you just kind of,
elaborate a little bit on that and o- o- obviously why this
is just so critical for the Port of Tauranga?
Sure. And, and, and the best way to, to answer that question is that at the
moment, port has a significant land holding.
We have 190 hectares here. Um, but we, we don't have
enough key length, enough berth length at our container terminal, and
that's what we're seeking to do through the, th- through the wharf extension.
And put simply, what that means is we can move from a two-berth operation to a
three-berth operation. And without that, we're actually turning away
services at the moment. And the significance of that is
a lack of competition and a cost to
shippers. So i- i- it's effectively a cost that gets passed
back to the likes of the Fonterras, the Zespris,
the, the other primary producers and exporters, wh- wh- who
aren't able... because w- we can't receive those additional services,
those additional port calls, and there's demand there for them now.
So the, the opportunity cost is there now, and it's
real.
And I suppose too, just in light of, you know, what we're seeing in the world at
the moment and how important those supply chains are and, I suppose,
attracting the ships here too.
Absolutely. Yeah. And, and, and look, there's other benefits too which we've talked
about in our submission. It's, it's about creating a,
lower carbon, supply chain for all of New Zealand.
It's, it's not just about the port, it's about New Zealand as exporters and
importers-
Mm, abso-
... consumers.
Absolutely. Look, Cameron has got another question.
Yeah. Thank you, Chair. Um, m- this question's about n- national
instruments. So in, in your submission you've talked about, making
sure that national infr- instruments provide a pathway for important
infrastructure. What do you think, the role of,
you know, industry, particularly ports or logistics, should
be in developing,
you know, national instruments like, you know, NPDs?
Do you think there should be a pathway to have feedback, put in at the
development stage?
Yeah, I'll, I'll take that question.
I think there should be at that higher, status.
Um, national policy direction, if the intent is to have this
funnel down approach, where you have your higher level documents that
funnel down to your lower level documents and those regional spatial
plans, your environmental plans that kind of govern what the
port can do sort of on your, day-to-day operation,
it's really important that the port has input into those higher level
documents and has a substantial opportunity to provide meaningful
input. Because if those are too constrained or too confined,
then what we're gonna find is that when we're having to participate in
regional level, planning frameworks, that we're gonna...
that the council, the submitters, and the port are gonna find themself
constrained on what they can actually do.
So it's important that we have direction at the high level, and like Dan
said, for these benefits that acknowledge the significance of the port and the fact
that it is nationally and regionally significant infrastructure.
And, and do you think that there should be an NPD or national standards
for, infrastructure that includes ports, or should there be, you know,
a, a separate, um-
Should be a s- yeah
... infrastructure or maritime NPD?
Should be a separate one. We've already seen a, one for the renewable energy
generation. There's been one for a while.
And ports, like we, like I mentioned earlier, are just as significant and
just as important to the nation, so there should be some specific
recognition in this national direction or national standards that acknowledge the
importance of port or maritime or something along the
like-
Thank you
... and provide a pathway for pushing port, developments and reconsents
through.
Just, I might just jump in and ask another quick question around, the permitted
activity rules, which, you know, you've raised, some
concerns about and, and a, and a lot of people have through the
submission process. I'm just interested to hear from your point of
view in terms of how you feel that could impact from,
practically from, from the ports, I
suppose the implication on the, on the port.
Yeah, I, I can take this one as well.
Um, so, yeah, we're-- the port's rightfully concerned, in my, in
our opinion, that some of the standards that come along with these permitted
activities w- in the bills as currently drafted will create a sort
of pseudo rec- reconsent process, such
as if there's requirements that, third party approval need to
be provided or that you have to provide certain documents or informa-
information to the consenting authority or the permitting authority
to demonstrate compliance with those standards.
Essentially, that's gonna create a big backlog, and it
could become just as cumbersome as applying for a reconsent under this current
process.
All the port activities then are exposed to the risk that they will be subject to
these standards. So every permitted activity that the port has to now
undertake, reports might have to be produced, third party
approval might need to be attained, and then that will all have to go off to
council
and go in this big backlog t-to be dealt with.
So that's just a lot of time, a lot of money, both on council's
part, third party's part, as well as the port's part that might not, that should
not need to be
incur-incurred if the framework structures permitted activities,
in a way that doesn't automatically require
notification or, approval
of third parties or
registration.
No, thank you. That explains things.
Uh, look, thank you very much for your submission
today. Uh, we appreciate it. Uh, we're seeing some common themes
come through. So, there's, members that have asked many
questions on many of these things throughout the day.
So, look, we appreciate it from your perspective, from the port's perspective,
and obviously a really important piece of infrastructure that,
yes, is very important for our economy. So thank you.
Um, grateful for the opportunity. Thanks.
Thank you.
So we now move to our next
submitter, who is,
the Insurance Council New Zealand.
And we can see you there, James. You have just, popped
up. Welcome to the Select Committee.
Are we expecting any-anyone else?
This is us.
This... Okay, brilliant. Very good. Very good.
Yeah, just to flag.
Sorry, just to flag here.
Welcome. Yes, Lan.
Um, we've just had a issue with Insurance Council's submission.
I don't know if anyone's been able to access it otherwise, but I haven't.
So just-
It's just come up on the portal, Lan.
I-
Yeah.
You should have got a copy o-of it or printed a copy maybe.
Um, but I think it's just-
No, there are no copies, but it's online now. Thanks.
Yeah, but maybe don't take it, assume that we've read it.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, that's, that's what I was flagging.
Because I didn't, I didn't have it.
Yeah, maybe some, some of us, some of us have, some of us have-haven't.
So why don't we hand it over to you to, talk us through
your, your great submission here.
Um, and look, you've got twenty minutes, and then we'll open up for
questions.
Oh, so thank you so much for having us, particularly at the end of the day.
We know you will have heard a lot of evidence already.
We've watched plenty of it ourselves.
Uh, we're the representative organization of the
general insurance companies in New Zealand.
Our members collectively write more than ninety-five percent of all general
insurance in New Zealand and protect over two trillion dollars in New Zealand
assets. I should have started at the very beginning. I'm James Bagen.
I'm the Resilience Leader here at the Insurance Council of New Zealand, and this is
Claire.
Hi, everybody. I'm Claire Wilde. I'm the Regulatory Affairs
Manager at FMG. We are an ICNZ member, and
I was involved in the development of ICNZ submission.
Nice to see you all today.
So in terms of, in terms of providing the absolute guts and gist of our
submission, that's something I've sort of been preparing for, so I can get into
that for you, which is the Insurance Council of New Zealand advocates to
sustain a strong, insurance sector and enhance the safety and
protection of all New Zealanders.
Uh, we, we advocate for this through the strengthening of resilience and reducing
the risks of climate change to communities and the economy.
We advocate for planned and proactive action to reduce the underlying natural
hazard risk, so insurance markets can be maintained and
sustained. We know we are faced with rising natural hazard
risk, so risk reduction and resilience measures need to increase.
Our submission focuses on the opportunity presented by this once in a generation
legislation to establish an enduring framework for reducing natural hazard
risk through improving planning and development practices.
But we acknowledge there's a lot going on in this space, which is where I'll hand
over to Claire.
So as, as some of you will have read, insurers are supportive of the
intent and direction of the new resource management regime, particularly
the move towards clearer national direction and explicit
consideration of risk, including natural hazard risk.
From our perspective, it's a positive shift.
At the same time, our experience is that outcomes will depend
heavily on the detail. This includes not just what's set out
in the primary legislation, but how the wider set of supporting
framework are designed and implemented in practice and how
well the system works as a whole. These
bills sit within a reform landscape that's both complex and
moving at pace. There's a significant volume of change
underway across central and local government, and many of these reforms are
interdependent. Resource management reform
is closely linked with lo-local government reform, emergency
management, modernization, and climate adaptation planning,
particularly in the context of natural hazard management.
Planning reforms emphasize risk-based decision making and stronger national
direction for national hazards, while proposed changes to local government
arrangements may affect where responsibilities lie and how they're carried
out.
Taken together, these reforms highlight that natural hazard management
cannot be addressed in isolation.
From an insurer perspective, alignment across, across these systems is
important to avoid gaps, duplication, or inconsistent risk
signals for communities, councils, insurers, and infrastructure
providers. Consistent application of the new
regime across local government will also be particularly
important. Where similar risks are treated very
differently in different parts of the country, that can create uncertainty and
undermine the confidence of the system.
Clear national direction, consistent data, and adequate capability
across local authorities all play a role in supporting more consistent
outcomes.
None of you will be surprised to hear me say that local authorities have
historically carried most of the practical workload under the
RMA, including consent pro-processing, technical
assessments, compliance activity, and community engagement.
That will continue under the new system, with local authorities remaining the
primary implementers who translate the direction into local
decisions. The ability of local
authorities to implement the r- new regime effectively and
consistently will be critical to its success.
That includes having access to the right skills, appropriate
templates, as well as sustainable funding that reflects the
scale of the responsibility placed.
Aware of context, we'd encourage the committee to pay close attention to
the design of the supporting framework, the consistency of
application across local authorities, and whether local government is
realistically equipped to implement what is being proposed.
I'll hand back to James now to cover some of the other points we raised in the
submission.
Thank you, Claire. Uh, climate hazards is definitely, my
focus in, in the role that the Insurance Council has given me, so,
this is definitely what I'm keen to talk about.
And one of the best resources on New Zealand's climate exposure going
at the moment is Parliament's Finance and Expenditure Committee's in-inquiry
into climate adaptation, that was completed recently.
That sets out the extent of the exposure in quite, in quite vivid
det-detail. For example, one excerpt from it, "As the number and value of assets in
our country increases over time, there will also be increasing exposure to climate
risk. Many New Zealanders live in areas susceptible to an increasing
level of risk. In twenty seventeen, the Climate Change Technical Working Group
estimated that seven hundred and fifty thousand New Zealanders and five hundred
thousand buildings worth over one hundred and forty-five billion dollars in
total are near rivers, coastlines, and are already exposed to extreme
flooding." Therefore, the general pillars we
advocate to respond to these challenges are investment in risk reduction and
resilience, improving local government tools such as resourcing and
capability, and the government's national adaptation framework, which
sets out how, as Claire was just discussing, it's clear that local government
will lead. We also advocate for improving the controls on
development in high-risk locations.
The academic term for this, which we use often, is "don't build in dumb places."
Local government is also the delivery agent here, and we need them to be supported
and enabled to stop development in areas where hazards, loss, and damages are not
unforeseen. Our submission focuses on the role this
legislation and subsequent national direction will play in improving the framework
for how local authorities can enable developing areas of low natural hazard risk
and stop or control development in areas of high natural hazard risk.
With respect to the Section Eleven goals, we understand deliberate cabinet
decision-making was to not have a hierarchy between the goals.
However, safeguarding communities from natural hazard risk must
supersede short-term land supply objectives, otherwise those land
suppli-supply goals will not be ultimately realized due to natural hazard impact on
that land. The question the committee may wish to consider is should the
bill be clearer on how these goals relate to each other, like in the example
above, or does that leave too much room for
interpretation? In our written submission, we set out a clause-by-clause
assessment with commentary on the provisions relating to natural hazard planning
and the controls in both bills. Insurers support development and growth in areas
where natural hazard impact is able to be kept at a level of sudden and
unforeseen. Our submission highlights the opportunity
of this legislation and national direction to better protect local authorities from
having f- from having their sound natural hazard
decision-making re-litigated. We've got a case, case study that illustrates
this. Uh, Tangoyo Beach development, which was reported in
the Hawke's Bay's independent flood review post Cyclone
Gabrielle. This is a quote directly from that review.
"The fact that there was relatively new housing developments in areas of known
flood risk suggests that lessons from the past have not been learnt and development
has been allowed in high-hazard areas.
Flood risk has been underestimated in some areas due to a lack of accounting for
large historic flood events. Esk Valley and Tangoyo Beach are particularly
relevant examples." We were subsequently infoin-- in-informed
that previous development decisions to withhold development consent for that
development due to natural hazard risk were successfully litigated against in the
years before Cyclone Gabrielle. Following Gabrielle, the land was assessed as
Category Three, unsafe for future residential living due to unacceptable flood
or landslide risk. This must be avoided under the new planning
system. Local authorities need a framework from this legislation and
national direction to stand by decisions that give effect to the goal of
safeguarding communities from natural hazard risk.
Proportionality wording in this goal needs to be very clearly unpacked in
national direction to give local authorities confidence in their decisions.
Thank you so much.
Go. Love. Uh, thank you very much, for that
submission. Um, yes, and I know that Hawke's Bay example very well,
obviously. Uh, yeah, look, I will hand over
to, a flurry of questions. We will start with Rachel
Brooking.
Thank you. Um, just, C- James, can you finish
what, what you were just saying, about what's needed, just in your sort of
last sentence? C-can you expand on that in terms
ofYou know, what mechanisms would be useful and, and if there's
additional wording that you're thinking about.
Um, I might... I know the committee's had a, a good conversation
with IAG, one of our members, about this, and it
might be a conversation for the committee's advisors and potentially
the drafters around that goal in section 11
(1) about the proportionality, the, the, the natural
hazard goal and the word proportionality in relation to
risk-based planning, and whether that creates an
opportunity for re-litigation of sound natural hazard
decision-making in spatial
plans.
Okay. Thank you. And but if, if you, if
you were drafting it, what, what would you
do?
I think our colleague Andrew Saunders' suggestion to the committee was a good
one there for potentially linking directly the proportionality to
risk.
Mm-hmm.
Ensuring that Parliament's intent was really clear there would be a, a really
good option.
Thanks.
It, it... I might actually just jump in there with just on that particular case,
just because when you say risk though, are we talking,
risk to life, risk to infrastructure,
risk to land? I suppose there's many, I suppose,
risks you could, you could say.
That's right. And we're quite wary to only go as far as our
membership body will go with us on that.
And it's important to always note that different insurers have different risk
appetites by competitive design, they're competitors.
Um, you know, competition law requires it to be competitive.
However, a useful proxy when we talk about that from risk to property
and future insurability is the sudden and unforeseen
test. So that's where the hazard in terms of it
causing loss and damage continues to be a sudden and unforeseen
event. That is a useful industry proxy for the ongoing
maintenance of availability, available and accessible insurance.
Mm. Okay. Okay, thank you. Look, we will go
to Cameron Luxton for a question.
Thank you, Chair. I just, I have a question and a sup.
It's, the first question is, like I live in Papamoa, Beach.
Um, there is a non-zero chance of a tsunami.
Do you think that the Tauranga City Council should
not allow development in Papamoa because of the risk of a
tsunami?
Thank you for that question, and it's one that we've actually had before in
separate audiences. That's again, where that sudden and unforeseen test
becomes really relevant to the, insurer's view of
risk, which we're seeking to align as close as we can appropriately
through things like nat- national direction is.
An event like a tsunami or a major earthquake
is absolutely in that category of sudden and unforeseen.
The return periods on those events,
without, without being an engineer, the return periods on those events are out in
the kind of one in 500, one in 1,000 level impact.
When we talk about climate, climate risk, rising natural hazard risks,
sudden and unforeseen potentially being drawn to question, that would
be something more like your stormwater network no longer flushes at
high tide.
Okay. All right. So I, so I understand that.
So then the next question would be, like if you
can... Well, actually, it's kind of, it's kind of shocking to say in a way
development in Papamoa is too high risk for, for the insurance model, but
I hope that's not what I just heard.
But the next thing would be, I mean, if, if insurance, insurers are gonna be
providing insurance for the following 12 months to a site, what
would actually be unforeseen, as in
changing in the environment that would make an insurer stop providing the
insurance? And how would planning foresee this long-term
change?
Like, if you, if insurer's not seeing it being a risk in the next 12 months, what
are you using to see it in the long term, and why is it that
developers, everybody else can't see it or can see
it?
Sophia, do you mind?
Um, I, I can offer some thoughts on that one.
I think the two are very interrelated.
So yes, we do look at the upcoming 12-month period, but the risk
that we're looking at within that 12-month period is very much hinged on the
longer-term,
foundations around that. So if we have strong foundations around that and
councils are going about these things in a consistent and
robust way, that's gonna give greater confidence coming back to
that 12-month period. So I don't think you can sort of look at the two in, in
isolation, if that makes sense.
Yeah, it does make sense. So then the question would be, if an in- if an insurer is
looking at something as having a, a risk, why,
like, you know, the control... Like I think there was a great quote there, the
technical quote of, "Don't build in dumb areas." I mean, an insurer looks at
it and says, "That's a dumb area." Um, isn't that, how is that communicated
to the, to a potential developer?
Ultimately, devel- development decision-making is, you know, that I guess that's
the point of the framework of this legislation.
Eventually, natural direction, spatial plans, and then the conversation that
developers will be having with their local authority in terms of when they apply
for consent. Um, in terms of, in terms of an
insurer's view of risk, as I think a really
important thing I touched on earlier is there isn't a unified view of risk in the
insurance sector. It's not like every insurer will take exactly the same
position, as within or without their risk
appetite. And that's why it's really important that you have that
codified in this legislation, in national direction, in spatial
plans, so the developers have certainty over where natural
hazard risk is acceptable and where it is
not.
I'll, I'll leave it there, Chair, but I'm happy to come back.
Yeah. Okay. Look, we'll, we'll move on. Um, Grant has a question.
Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, yeah, thank you for this, presentation and
submission. So
one of the things that's come up during our, the last few, all the
submissions-Is that some people wanted the councils to focus
not only on adaption but mitigation around climate risk.
Um, so from your perspective, which is the best area for
them, for councils and, and, and planners to focus
on, yeah, from an insurance
perspective?
Can I just be clear, when you say mitigation, do you, do you mean local authorities
monitoring their own emissions output and things like that?
Well, and, and amongst everything else that, you know, investing into, in
mitigation or, or assessing consents against, re-
getting, emissions reduction.
Yeah, and, and, and spending money in that space. Yeah.
I think that those are really important considerations, that local authorities
are welcome to have, in relation-
Yeah
... to the re- relevant regulatory regimes they have to comply with.
From an insurer view of risk, the way that risk is
assessed by insurers, and again, I'm not saying it's done in any uniform way,
really important point, is you've got a forward-looking hazard
model. Um, they'll purchase a private sector flood model, which will, which will
pick up different climate warming scenarios over time.
Um, however, a, an individual local authority's emissions
reduction action, while really important for that local authority, wouldn't
necessarily be material to an insurer's view of risk.
Yeah. So therefore, like-
Can I just say as well?
Sorry, carry on, Claire. Yeah.
I was just gonna say, if I can add to that, it comes back to the, the point I was
trying to convey at the beginning about it being an, an entire system.
Mm.
So we can't look at any one of these things in isolation.
But climate mitigations, I, I don't wanna say they're more important than, than
something else the council-
Yeah
... might be doing, but it's all part of the greater mix.
Yeah. I, I mean, I, I'm not downplaying the, the...
I think climate mitigation's a good thing, but in terms of if you've got limited,
limited funds and, and the council's say, "Okay, we can either build
this, s- flood bank to pr- protect a
township, or improve it, versus investing in, in
something else that's gonna may- maybe lower emissions," w- from
an insurance point of view, which is gonna give you greater confidence in the
insurance market about how you approach it?
Can I just give you one example, and I don't want it to be that this is,
the whole industry.
Sure.
But the one example we have is that a reinsurer,
I... Hopefully I don't have to explain reinsurance, but a reinsurer in terms of
their assessment of their risk appetite for New Zealand domestic insurers,
they will notice when a flood mitigation scheme is put in.
They, like-
Right
... in ter- in, in terms, in terms of their appetite to cede reinsurance capacity
to a community, the presence of a flood mitigation scheme will be material
to their decision-making.
Yep. Okay. No.
Um, which I-
And you're talking about sort of building up a flood, like, flood protection you're
talking about? Yep. Yep. Okay. Thank you. That's very helpful.
Thank you.
Look, thank you very much, for your submission
today. Uh, lots of valuable considerations there.
Um, obviously the insurance sector are very important in, all of this
resource management framework, that we're working on.
So we appreciate, the work that you've done on your submission and
presenting to us today. So thank you very
much.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
So members, that brings us to the end of our, public
hearings for today. Uh, so now we're going
to move into private session. Um, so we will head
out of this link and into the other.
So thank-